
SELECTED LETTERS

NIETZSCHE To His SISTER.

Naumburg, March 30, 185f\
DEAR ELIZABETH :

A mother is writing to you to-day I am sending
you a short note to put with hers. First of all,
let me describe our journey. On the way to
Weissenfels there was nothing I objected to more than
the piercing wind, and in this respect my two coats
served me in good stead. We reached the station
almost an hour before the train came in. In the sta
tion buffet I read the Vossische Zeitung, which had a
good deal to say about the Imperial baby. 1 It is said
to have three nurses and three governesses, one of the
former having allowed him to fall. The nurse in ques
tion fainted immediately, but the child is supposed
to have given vent to a shriek loud enough for a child
a year old. He has already received two orders: the
Cross of the Legion of Honour, and one other military
order. Mother asked for a glass of sugared water
just as the train entered the station. We quickly ate
the sugar and wanted to get away to our train, but
were stopped by the waiter who wanted change. We
could not settle with him until at length he gave me
one more sugar cake. We could scarcely find any
room in the train, but at last found two seats. On
reaching Naumburg we drove in with Bocher. When
we reached the door of the house, little Eosa, Mine,

1 Thc on of Napoleon III was born on March 16, 1856.

1



2 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and Ottos were standing there and were very glad to
see us back; but grandmamma said she would have
been ever so pleased if you had been with us. You
will certainly be delighted with Pobles, for it is a very
pretty place. I suppose you often play at ball and
will be able to hit it better than I can when you come
back. I have just heard that William is very ill ; he
has rheumatic fever. I wanted to take him an orange,
but was not allowed to see him. So I went to Gustav,
who was very much delighted with the paper for the
walls of the forts. He thanks you very much indeed
and greatly admires the cheapness of things in Magde
burg. My school time-table has been changed a good
deal, for my lessons start at 7. I have not yet played
with the soldiers, but will do so soon. I often wish I
were at Pobles, too, and thank our grandparents very
heartily for the nice stay I had there. Remember me
most affectionately to them and also to Uncles Ed
mund, Theobald, Oscar, and to our aunts. Keep well
and write frequent letters to your brother,

FRIEDRICH WILHELM NIETZSCHE.



NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Pforta, 1 November 11, 1859.

DEAR MAMMA :

At last I have time to answer your nice letter. I
also have something to tell you to-day that will in
terest you, and that is how our Schiller festival went



Nietzsche had been a pupil at the famous school of Pforta
since 1858. Translator.



F R I E D R I C H NIETZSCHE 3

off. Wednesday, November 9, was "Lie-a^bed day 1
as usual, but in the afternoon at 4 o clock there was
a fine celebration, for which preparations had been
going on for some time. First of all, at 3.30 p. m. all
the Pforta teachers and their wives, at 3.45 the whole
coetus, and at 4 p. in. all the people of Naumburg,
who flocked in greater numbers than ever before,
arrived in the gymnasium, which was decorated quite
festively. The boys of the Sixth Form opened the per
formance with a reading of the Piccolomini. Profes
sor Koberstein chose the part of Wallenstein himself
and read it magnificently.. Then "The Bell," com
posed by Romberg, was sung with piano and violin
accompaniment. It was wonderfully successful, and
everybody was very much moved, particularly by the
fine chorus, in "Freedom and Equality it is heard to
toll," etc. (I have been in the ladies choir some time
now, and had the joy of rehearsing this peace with
them.) The following day was also "Lie-a bed day,"
with lessons until 9.30 a, m. ; then followed another
celebration in the gymnasium, beginning with the
choir, Frisch auf Kameraden. Then came the recita
tion of original poems written by Upper School boys
about various incidents in Schiller s life. Herzog and
von Gohring then sang, "Before His Lion-garden" and
"Oh, From Out This Valley s Grounds," with piano
accompaniment, and then Professor Koberstein
stepped on to the platform. He gave an excellent



"Lie aTbed day" (Ausschlafetag) was the day in the week
on which the boys were allowed to get up half an hour later
than usual (5 a. m. in summer and 6 a. m. in winter) in order
to devote themselves to private studies the whole day (E.F.N. s
note.)



4 SELECTED LETTERS OF

address, in which he laid particular stress upon the
fact that it was a hopeful sign for Germany that the
birthdays of her great men were becoming ever more
and more the occasions for national festivities which,
in spite of the political disunion of the country, were
welding her into a single whole. Then followed a
good feed with roast goose and cakes, after which we
were allowed to go out for a walk until 3 o clock. I
called on Aunt Rosalie, who gave me a cup of choco
late. In the evening the Sixth Form had a dance, but
the rest of us had music in the ballroom. Now, wasn t
that a fine festival? I am delighted with your idea
of returning to Naumburg at Christinas and am much
looking forward to that lovely time.


So you have sent dear Lizzie right away for some
considerable time, and she will certainly wish to be
back and will not feel very much at home in the great
city of Dresden. You yourself must have spent some
beautiful days there, particularly owing to your recol
lections of bygone times; for, as the years roll by,
everything that once caused us pleasure or surprise
becomes a precious memory. And it must have cost
you something to say good-bye to Lizzie and to Dres
den of that I am well aware. As to how she is
settled there, I know nothing; write me a long and
exhaustive letter. Indeed, we might both of us write
more exhaustively to each other, as there is no need



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 5

now for you to spend so much of your time over your
house duties.

I only hope she has been sent to a thoroughly good
school. I cannot say I like Dresden very much ; it is
not grand enough, and in detail, even in its language,
it is too Thuringian in character. If she had gone
to Hanover, for instance, she would have become ac
quainted with customs, peculiarities, and a language
of an absolutely different order. It is always a good
thing, if one does not wish to become too one-sided,
to be educated in different places. Otherwise, as a
city of art, as the seat of a small court, and generally
for the purpose of completing E. s education, Dresden
will be quite suitable, and to some extent I envy her.
Still, I believe that in my life I shall have oppor
tunities enough of enjoying experiences of the kind
she is having. Altogether I am very anxious to hear
how Elizabeth gets on in her new surroundings. There
is always a certain element of risk in such schools.
But I have thorough confidence in Elizabeth. If only
she could learn to write a little better! When she
is describing anything, too, she must try and avoid all
those "Ahs!" and "Ohs!" "You cannot imagine how
magnificent, how marvellous, how bewitching, etc., it
was," etc. she must drop this sort of thing, and very
much more that she will, I hope, forget in refined
company and by keeping a sharp lookout on herself.
Now, dear Mamma, on Monday you will come out
here, won t you? The performance is from 4 to 7 p. m.
I have asked Dr. Heinze for a ticket. I should be
awfully glad if you would send me half a mandala
each of sugar and eggs, because for our rehearsals,



6 SELECTED LETTERS OF

which are held twice a day and three times on the
day of the performance, some such treatment for the
voice is absolutely necessary.

Farewell, dear Mamma !

Your FRITZ.

( Marginal note. ) As you will have plenty of time
for reading now, I would recommend Auerbach s
"Barfiissele." I was highly delighted with it.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Pforta, November 10, 1862.
DEAR MAMMA:

I am very sorry that I was not able to meet you
at Almrich yesterday, but I was prevented from com
ing by being kept in. And thereby hangs a tale which
I will tell you.

Every week one of the newest Sixth Form boys has
to undertake the duties of schoolhouse prefect that
is to say, he has to make a note of everything in the
rooms, cupboards, and lecture rooms that requires
repair, and to send up a list of his observations to
the inspection office. Last week I had to perform
this duty, and it occurred to me that its somewhat
tedious nature might be slightly relieved by the exer
cise of a little humour, and I wrote out a list in which
all my observations were couched in the form of jokes. 1
The stern masters, who were very much surprised
that anyone should introduce humour into so solemn



The remarks were very harmless, for instance: "In such
and euch a lecture room the lamps burn so dimly that the boys
are tempted to let their own brilliance shine." "The forms of
the Fifth Form Room have recently been painted and manifest
an undesirable attachment for those who sit upon them."



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 7

an undertaking, summoned me to attend the Synod
on Saturday and pronounced the following extraor
dinary sentence: Three hours detention and the
loss of one or two walks. If I could accuse myself
of any other fault than that of thoughtlessness, I
should be angry about it; but as it is I have not
troubled myself for one moment about the matter, and
have only drawn this moral from it : To be more care
ful in future what I joke about.

To-day is Martinmas Day, 1 and we have had the
usual Martinmas goose for dinner (in twelve parts,
of course). St. Nicholas Day, too, will soon be here.
This period of transition from autumn to winter is a
pleasant time; it is the preparation for Christmas
which I enjoy so much. Let us thoroughly enjoy it
together. Write to me soon. My love to dear uncle

and Lizzie.

FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.
Thursday Morning, Pforta, April, 1863.
DEAR. MOTHER :

If I write to you to-day it is certainly about the
saddest and most unpleasant business that it has ever
been my lot to relate. For I have been very wicked
and do not know whether you will or can forgive me.
It is with a heavy heart and most unwillingly that I
take up my pen to write to you, more particularly
when I think of our pleasant and absolutely unruffled
time together during the Easter holidays. Well, last
Sunday I got drunk and have no excuse but this, that

The birthday of Martin Luther. Translator.



8 SELECTED LETTERS OF

I did not know how much I could stand and that I
happened to be somewhat excited that afternoon.
When I returned, Herr Kern, one of the masters,
came across me in that condition. He had me called
before the Synod on Tuesday, when I was degraded
to third of my division and one hour of my Sunday
walk was cancelled. You can imagine how depressed
and miserable I feel about it, and especially at having
to cause you so much sorrow over such a disgraceful
affair, the like of which has never occurred in my life
before. It also makes me feel very sorry on the Rev.
Kletschke s account, who had only just shown me such
unexpected confidence. 1 Through this one lapse I
have completely spoilt the fairly good position I suc
ceeded in winning for myself last term. I am so
much annoyed with myself that I can t even get on
with my work or settle down at all. Write to me
soon and write severely, for I deserve it ; and no one
knows better than I do how much I deserve it.

There is no need for me to give you any further
assurances as to how seriously I shall pull myself
together, for now a great deal depends upon it. I had
once again grown too cocksure of myself, and this self-
confidence has now, at all events, been completely
shaken, and in a very unpleasant manner.

I shall go and see the Rev. Kletschke to-day and
have a talk with him. By-the-bye, do not tell anyone
anything about it if it is not already known. Also,
please send me my muffler as soon as possible, for I
am constantly suffering from hoarseness and pains in



*He had just made Nietzsche his assistant. Translator.



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 9

my chest. Send me the comb too that I have spoken
about. Now, good-bye and write to me very soon, and
do not be too cross with me, mother dear.
Your very sorrowful

FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Pforta, May, 1863.
DEAR MOTHER :

As regards my future, it is precisely my practical
doubts about it that trouble me. The decision as to
what subject I shall specialize in will not come of
its own accord. I must, therefore, consider the ques
tion and make my choice, and it is precisely this
choice which causes me so many difficulties. Of
course, it will be my endeavour to study thoroughly
anything that I decide to take up, but it is precisely
on this account that the choice is so difficult ; for one
feels constrained to choose that branch of study in
which one can hope to do something complete. And
how illusory such hopes often are; how often does
one not allow oneself to be transported by a momen
tary prepossession, or by an old family tradition, or
by one s own personal wishes, so that the choice of a
calling seems like a lottery in which there are a large
number of blanks and very few winning numbers.
Now, I happen to be in the particularly unfortunate
position of possessing a whole host of interests con
nected with the most different branches of learning,
and, though the general gratification of these interests
may make a learned man of me, they will scarcely
convert me into a creature with a vocation. The fact,



10 SELECTED LETTERS OF

therefore, that I must destroy some of these interests
is perfectly clear to me, as well as the fact that I must
allow some new ones to find a home in my brain. But
which of them will be so unfortunate as to be cast
overboard? Perhaps just the children of my heart!

I cannot express myself more plainly ; it is evident
that the position is critical and I must have come to
a decision by this time next year. It certainly won t
come of its own accord, and I know too little about
the various subjects.

Best wishes to you all.

FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER AND SISTER.

Elberfeld, Sept. 27, 1864.
DEAR MAMMA AND LIZZIE :

From the look of my handwriting you are to gather
that I am writing to you from a business house. I
am thinking how glad you will be to have news of
me so soon, particularly as I have only good and
pleasant things to tell you. Of course, what I should
have liked most of all would have been to tell you
everything by word of mouth, but the time seems long
past when this wish might have been gratified.

There was nothing very beautiful or interesting
about the journey; first of all, a number of sleepy and
snoring travelling companions, then some very talka
tive, noisy and common ones, followed by factory
hands and business men or very exacting old ladies;
I could tell a funny story about each one of these
varieties.

We arrived at about 11 o clock at night feeling



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 11

sleepy and somewhat peevish. Believe me, one feels
amazingly tired after such a long day s journey. We
put up at Briinning s, at the house of two ladies who
were not so very old and their brother, who was in
bed with gastric fever. We refreshed ourselves with
bread and wine, went to bed, slept splendidly, got up
late, had our breakfast consisting here, as every
where, of fine rolls and slices of Pumpernickel bread
and then we called on the Rohrs and found Johanna
and Marie at home both nice girls but not quite my
style; they were a little tasteless in their dress. Of
course, one must not forget that they are under the
care of a very pious old lady, with whom on the fol
lowing day I became involved in a long discussion
about the theatre, "the work of the Devil," and held
my ground very well, but only succeeded in earning
her compassion for one who held such views as mine
We have been invited to coffee there to-day. Well, on
Sunday I made the acquaintance of Ernest Schnabel,
an exceedingly attractive young business man ; as you
know, he is Deussen s well-known and more favoured
rival; and I also met Friedrich Deussen, who has a
post in a business firm here. In the afternoon we
went up together into the hills that encircle Elber-
feld. Imagine a beautiful long valley, the valley of
the Wupper, through which a number of ill-defined
straggling towns, one of which is Elberfeld, extend
like a mighty chain of factories, and you have a pic
ture of these parts. The town is commercial in the
extreme, and most of the houses are slate roofed. I
notice that the women here have a particular predi
lection for drooping their heads in a pious way. The



12 SELECTED LETTERS OF

girls dress very smartly in little coats very tight at
the waist, like that Polish girl from Kosen. The men
all display a fondness for light brown, their hats,
trousers, etc., all being of that colour. After we had
been to several restaurants on Sunday, we spent the
evening most congenially at Ernest Schnabel s, where
we stayed till 11 p. m. He gave us an extremely fine
Moselle to drink "Pastor s Moselle Drink," .as Ernest
called it. My improvising at the piano had a great
success, and my health was most solemnly drunk. As
Lizzie would say, Ernest is "perfectly enchanted."
Wherever I am, I have to play and everybody cries
"Bravo!" It is ludicrous. Yesterday we drove to
Schwelm, a neighbouring watering place; we visited
the red hills, a famous site of the ancient WestphaHan
Vehme court, and we had a drink everywhere.

In the evening, at the inn, I played without know
ing it in the presence of a famous orchestra conductor,
who stood there afterwards gasping with wonder and
said all sorts of nice things to me. He also begged
me to join his choral society that evening a thing I
did not do. Instead I drove back and was invited to
dine with the Schnabel family. They are nice, good
people. Mrs. Schnabel is delightful, and her husband
is a decent, pious, conservative business man. They
have the most excellent food, and the drinks are even
better, but their dishes are different from ours. They
eat Gruyre cheese and Pumpernickel bread three
times a day.

. . . Now, good-bye, good-bye! Hearty remem
brances to Aunt Rosalie.

Your FRITZ.


. On Sunday we were en masse in Sieburg,
where we marched through the streets cheering,
danced, and returned rather late. An hour ago I was
at an exceedingly distinguished concert; it was an
extraordinary display of wealth. All the ladies were
dressed in bright red, 1 and English was spoken all
over the hall; I don t speak English. 2 Admittance
cost three marks, but as I am one of the performers
it cost me nothing. But to make up for things I went
there dressed as smartly as possible, with a white
waistcoat and kid gloves.

I seem to write an inordinate number of letters,
and yet I get none except from you. Have Gersdorff
and Kuttig been to see you? Remember me to them
and also to the dear Naumburg aunts.

Ever with devotion and love.

Your FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER AND SISTER.

Bonn, End of February, 1865.

Saturday.
MY DEAR MAMMA AND LIZZIE :

The lovely time of the holidays draws ever nearer,
and I must confess that my longing to see you again
grows keener every day. You might shortly start
making the preparations for my arrival, for I shall



The fashionable colour at the time. E.F.N.
*The words in italics are in English in the original. Trans
lator.



14 SELECTED LETTERS OF

be with you soon after the middle of next month. The
more disagreeable the weather is now, the more do I
like to dwell upon the beautiful days at Easter, and
naturally I have never felt so happy at the thought of
the holidays as I feel now. How delightful life will
seem for me in your dear company, compared with
the life I lead here, so destitute of all family associa
tions! In addition to that, I shall be near so many
dear friends, and to dear old Pforta, to which we old
Pforta boys are so absurdly attached.

I imagine the whole of this passage will make you
feel a little wistful; but unfortunately I must dis
sipate this mood for you by referring to the inevitable
and irksome question of money. Among other things
now I am going to the most desperate efforts to make
two ends meet, and, like the Treasury, on drawing up
my budget for the year I arrive only at the most
hopeless results. Among the financial coups I have in
view is the plan of moving out of my present lodgings
next term, giving up the hire of a piano in order to
put it quite plainly to cut down expenses. One
learns a tremendous lot in one term, even in the realm
of material things; but it is a pity that one has to
pay so dearly for these lessons. But now I will close
these pathetic and bathetic details by begging you,
dear Mamma, to send me the money for the next two
months in a lump sum of not less than 240 marks, to
include my railway fare. Altogether I am not in
favour of monthly instalments; they inevitably lead
one into debt. Up to the present I have only been in a
position to settle the most pressing debts of the previ
ous month by means of these monthly instalments and



PRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 15

have scarcely ever had any cash in hand. Generally
speaking, it is quite out of. the question for me to hope
to get on at Bonn on less than 1,200 marks, and that
was the amount my guardian promised me at the
beginning of my university life. If you only knew
how we live here you would understand this. It is
the minimum amount possible in the circumstances.

So now I have said all I had to say on this matter,
although I know perfectly well that it will not please
you any more than it pleases me. Why can t I settle
all this direct with my guardian? These things spoil
my beautiful letters! And now let me beg of you
once more not to fail me and thus plunge me into
difficulties from which I could and should have to
extricate myself only by borrowing the money in
some way.

And now let us banish all care from our brow and
chat pleasantly for a while. The things I have to
tell you naturally accumulate more and more every
day. . . .

I pass here among the students, etc., as something
of an authority on music, and as a queer customer
into the bargain, like all old Pforta boys in the Fran-
conia. 1 I am not disliked at all, although I am apt to
scoff a little and am considered as somewhat ironical.
This estimate of my character, according to the
opinions of other people, will not be without interest
to you. For my part I must add that I do not agree
to the first particular, that I am frequently unhappy
and that I have too many moods and am rather in-

The Franconia was the Students Corps that Nietzsche
joined. Translator.



16 SELECTED LETTERS OF

clined to be a nagging spirit (Qutilgeist) not only to
myself, but also to others.

And now good-bye ! For Heaven s sake send me the
money in good time, and remember me to our dear
relatives. With hearty thanks for your nice letters
and begging you still to think kindly of me in spite of
this one,

FRIEDBICH WILHELM NIETZSCHE.

To FEEIHEER KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Bonn, May 25, 1865.
DEAR FRIEND:

To begin with, I must own that I have been simply
longing for your first letter from Gottingen, not only
out of friendship, but also because of its psychological
interest. I was hoping that it might reflect the im
pression just made upon you by the life led in the
Students Corps, and I felt certain that you would
speak out quite frankly on the subject.

Now, this is precisely what you have done, and I
thank you most heartily. At present, therefore, I
share your excellent brother s views on this matter;
I can only admire the moral strength with which you
have plunged into dirty muddy water and even exer
cised your limbs in it, in order to learn to swim in
the stream of life. Pardon the cruelty of the meta
phor, but I think it meets the case.

Besides, there is this important point to remember :
if a man wishes to understand his age and his con
temporaries, he must be something of a colour student.
Societies and associations, together with the ten
dencies they represent, generally reveal with almost



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 17

perfect exactitude the type of the next generation of
men. Moreover, the question of the reorganization
of the circumstances of student life is urgent enough
to deter the individual from investigating and judging
the conditions from his own particular experience.

Of course, we must take care that we ourselves do
not become too deeply influenced during the process
of our research; for habit exercises a prodigious
power. A man has already lost a good deal when
he can no longer feel any moral indignation at the
reprehensible actions daily perpetrated in his circle.
This is true, for instance, of drink and drunkenness,
and also of the disrespect and scorn with which other
men and other opinions are treated.

I readily admit that, up to a point, I had very much
the same experiences as yourself, that the spirit of
conviviality on drinking evenings often discomfited
me exceedingly, that there were fellows whose "beer
materialism" made them utterly repulsive to me;
whilst the appalling arrogance with which in a twink
ling men and opinions were disposed of en masse used
to irritate me beyond endurance. Nevertheless I was
content to bear with the Association, not only because
it taught me a good deal, but also because I was, on
the whole, compelled to acknowledge the intellectual
life which formed a part of it. On the whole, though,
a more intimate relationship with one or two friends
is a necessity, and, provided one can enjoy this,, the
rest can be reckoned as a sort of seasoning included
in the fare some as salt and pepper, others as sugar,
and yet others as nothing at all.

Once again let me assure you that all you have told



J.8 SELECTED LETTERS OF

me about your struggles and anxieties only enhances
my esteem and love for you.

This term I have to prepare our archaeological work
for the college. Then I also have a bigger piece of
work to do for the Science evening of our Burschen-
schaft [Corps] about the political poets of Germany.
I hope to learn a good deal from this, but I shall also
have to do a tremendous amount of reading and col
lect plenty of material. Above all, however, I must
set about preparing a more important philological
work, the subject of which I have not yet decided, in
order to qualify for admittance to the college at
Leipzig.

Incidentally I am now studying Beethoven s Life
in the biography by Marx. I shall also perhaps do
a little composing again, a thing which this year I
have so far strenuously avoided. I have also stopped
versifying. The Rhineland Musical Festival takes
place this Whitsun at Cologne. Do come over from
Gottingen for it! The principal items on the pro
gramme are: Israel in Egypt, by Handel; Faust
Music, by Schumann; The Seasons, by Haydn, etc.,
etc. I am taking part in it. Immediately after it
the Cologne International Exhibit will be opened.
You will find all further details in the papers.

Well, old man, fare thee well!

I rejoice at the thought of our next meeting. I wish
you plenty of good cheer and bright spirits, and, above
all, a man who can be something to you. Excuse my
execrable writing and my ill humour about it. You



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 19

know how wild I get over it and how my thoughts
then come to a standstill.

Your devoted friend,

FR. NIETZSCHE.
Bonn, Ascension Day, 1865.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Bonn, June 30, 1865.

Friday Morning.
DEAR MAMMA:

. I am very much disgusted by the bigoted
Roman Catholic population here. Often I can scarcely
believe that we are in the nineteenth century. Not
long ago it was Corpus Christi Day. Processions
after the style of that of the Church Festival ; every
body very finely got up and therefore full of vanity,
and yet going into all kinds of pious contortions,
croaking and groaning old women, tremendous squan
dering of incense, wax candles, and festoons of flowers.
On the afternoon of the same day a genuine Tyrolean
company gave a concert with the usual affected natu
ralness and the stereotyped emotions in the rendering
of the Andreas Hofer 1 song.

You will have read in the papers about the Rhine-
land festival. As everybody knows, the Rhineland
was annexed to Prussia fifty years ago. The King,
the General Staff, and several Ministers attended the
ceremony. The papers speak of the enthusiasm and

This refers to Andreas Hofer, who led the rising of the
Tyrolese against Napoleon in 1809. He was ultimately deliv
ered into the hands of the French by a traitor, and Napoleon
ordered him to be shot. Translator.



20 SELECTED LETTERS OF

rejoicing of the people. As I was in Cologne at the
time, I can form my own estimate of these rejoicings.
I was amazed by such coldness on the part of the
masses. But I really cannot see where the enthusiasm
for the King and his Ministers should come from at
this particular juncture. All the same, externally
the ceremony was extremely imposing. The Ehine,
the bridge over it, the innumerable hotels on the
banks, the towers, and the mighty cathedral all ablaze
with illuminations, a continuous deafening boom of
guns and muskets, myriads of fireworks all let off at
the same time at various points all these seen from
the opposite bank produced an almost magical im
pression. It would be impossible to imagine a finer
effect for an opera. The King in a steamer sailed up
and down stream in the midst of it all ; the youth of
Cologne created enthusiasm by singing the Duppel
march 1 ; the masses cheered at the sight of such fine
things, and the monarch was well pleased.

I saw some fine uniforms there, my dear Lizzie.
But the old generals who wore these beautiful clothes
strolled through the streets smiling good-naturedly;
for they had happily survived the Duppel engagement
of a copious dinner and were all very drunk with
victory.

Not long ago we that is to say, the Franconians
had a Comm-crtt* with two other student associations,
the Helvetia and the Marchia. Oh ! what bliss ! Oh !



*It was at Duppel that the decisive battle was fought be
tween the Germans and the Danes (April, 1864).

-This is the name given to a bibulous meeting of a German
students Association. Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 21

the marvellous exploits of the Students Association !
Do we represent the future of Germany? Are we not
the nursery of German parliaments? "It is some
times difficult," says Juvenal, "to refrain from writ
ing a satire."

I think I have already told you that we have
changed the colours in our caps. We now wear fine
red south-westers, with gold braid and broad black
chin straps.

. Remember me to dear Lizzie and all our
relatives and friends.

Your affectionate

FRITZ.

To FBEIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, April 7, 1866.
DEAR FRIEND:

Now and again one enjoys hours of peaceful reflec
tion when, with mingled gladness and sorrow, one
seems to hover over one s life just as those lovely sum
mer days, so exquisitely described by Emerson, seem
to lie stretched out at ease above the hilltops. It is
then, as he says, that Nature is perfect, and we feel
the same ; then we are free from the spell of the ever-
vigilant will; then we are nothing but a pure, con
templative and dispassionate eye. 1 It is in a mood
such as this a mood desirable above all others that
I take up my pen to reply to your kind and thoughtful
letter. The interests we share have become welded



remark reveals Schopenhauerian influence. Trans
lator.



22 SELECTED LETTERS OF

together to the smallest particle; once again we have
realized that mere strokes of the pen in fact, even
the most unexpected whims in the past of a few in
dividuals determine the history of countless numbers
of others; and we readily leave it to the pious to
thank their God for these accidents. We may per
haps laugh at this thought when we meet again in
Leipzig.

I had already made myself familiar with the thought
of being a soldier. I often wished that I might be
snatched from my monotonous labours ; I yearned for
the opposite extreme to my excitement, to the tem
pestuous stress of my life and to the raptures of my
enthusiasm. For, despite all my efforts, it has been
brought home to me more clearly every day that it is
impossible to shuffle such work out of one s coat sleeve.
During the holidays I have learnt, relatively speaking,
a good deal, and now they are at an end. My Theognis
finds itself at least one term further forward. I have,
moreover, made many illuminating discoveries which
will considerably enrich my quacstioncs Theognideae. 1

For recreation I turn to three things, and a won
derful recreation they provide! my Schopenhauer,
Schumann s music, and, finally, solitary walks. Yes
terday a heavy storm hung in the sky, and I hastened
up a neighbouring hill, called Leusch (perhaps you
can explain the word to me?). On the summit I
found a liut and a man killing two kids, with his son

Theognis, the aristocratic poet of Megara, awoke
Nietzsche s interest even when he was still at Pforta. Trans
lator.



FBIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 23

looking on. The storm broke with a mighty crash,
discharging thunder and hail, and I felt inexpressibly
well and full of zest, and realized with singular clear
ness that to understand Nature one must go to her
as I had just done, as a refuge from all worries and
oppressions. What did man with his restless will
matter to me then? What did I care for the eternal
"Thou shalt" and "Thou slialt not"? How different
are lightning, storm and hail free powers without
ethics! How happy, how strong they are pure will
untrammeled by the muddling influence of the
intellect !

For have I not seen examples enough of how mud
dling a man s intellect frequently is? Not long ago
I had occasion to speak to a man who was on the
point of going out to India as a missionary. I put
a few questions to him and learned that he had not
read a single Indian work, knew nothing about the
Upanishads not even their name and had resolved
to have nothing to do with the Brahmaus because they
had philosophical training. Holy Ganges!

To-day I listened to a profoundly clever sermon of

s on Christianity the Faith that has conquered

the world. It was intolerably haughty in its attitude
towards all nations that were not Christian, and yet
it was exceedingly ingenious. For instance, every
now and then he would describe as Christian some
thing else, which always gave an appropriate sense
even according to our lights. If the sentence, "Chris
tianity has conquered the world," be changed to "the
feeling of sin," or briefly "a metaphysical need has
conquered the world," we can raise no reasonable ob-



24 SELECTED LETTERS OF

jection ; but then one ought to be consistent and say,
"All true Hindus are Christians," and also "All true
Christians are Hindus." As a matter of fact, how
ever, the interchange of such words and concepts as
these, which have a fixed meaning, is not altogether
honest; it lands the poor in spirit in total confusion.
If by Christianity is meant "Faith in an historical
event, or in an historical personage," I have nothing
to do with it. If, however, it is said to signify briefly
a craving for salvation or redemption, then I can set
a high value upon it, and do not even object to its
endeavouring to discipline the philosophers. For how
very few these are compared to the vast masses of
men who are in need of salvation ! How many of them
are not actually made of the same stuff as these
masses! If only all those who dabble in philosophy
were followers of Schopenhauer ! But only too often
behind the mask of philosopher stands the exalted
majesty of the "Will," which is trying to achieve its
own self-glorification. If the philosophers ruled
SO^UY^ oi 1 would be lost ; were the masses to prevail,
as they do at present, the philosophers rari in gurgite
rasto* would still be able, like Aeschylus, 8ix aMoov
cpQoveetv. 3

Apart from this, it is certainly extremely irksome
to restrain our Schopenhauerian ideas, still so young,
vigorous and half expressed; and to have weighing



The Masses.

Few survivors in the unmeasured seas." From the famous
verse in Virgil s Aeneid, I. 118. Translator.

""To differ from the opinions of others." See Aeschylus,
Agamemnon 757. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 25

forever upon our hearts this unfortunate disparity
between theory and practice. And for this I can think
of no consolation ; on the contrary, I am in need of
it myself.

And now farewell, old man! Remember me to all
your family. Mine wish to be remembered to you;
let us leave it at that. When we meet again we shall
probably smile, and rightly too !

Yours,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Leipzig, End of January, 1867.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

At the beginning of January at Naumburg I too
stood at the deathbed of a near relative. Next to my
mother and sister, this dear lady had the greatest
claim on my love and veneration. She had always
displayed the most devoted interest in my career, and
with her I seem to have lost a whole piece of my past
and especially of my childhood. And yet, when I
received your letter, my poor dear afflicted friend, I
was overcome by a much deeper grief. The difference
between the two deaths seemed so enormous. There,
in Naumburg, a life replete with good deeds had at
last been consummated, and despite a weakly constitu
tion had at least lasted well into old age. We all had
the feeling that the strength both of her mind and
her body was exhausted, and that only for our love
had death come too soon. But what have we not lost
by the death of your brother, before whom I too stood
in such constant admiration and respect!



26 SELECTED LETTERS OF

We have lost one of those rare noble Roman natures
about whom Rome at her zenith would have boasted
and of whom you, as his brother, have an even greater
right to be proud. For how seldom does our wretched
age produce such heroic figures ! But you know what
the ancients thought on the subject: "Those whom
the gods love die young."

What wonders such a power might have achieved!
As a pattern of self-peliant and glorious endeavour,
as an example of a decided character true to himself
and indifferent to the world and its opinion, what
strength and comfort he might have afforded to thou
sands caught in life s wild vortex! I am well aware
that this vir bonus in the best sense meant even more
to you ; that, as you often used to tell me in the past,
he constituted the ideal to which you aspired, your
fixed guiding star amid all the tortuous and difficult
highways and byways of life. His death has probably
been the severest blow that could possibly have over
taken you.

Now, dear old man, you have realized so I gather
from the tone of your letter through your own bitter
experience, why our Schopenhauer extols suffering
and affliction as indispensable to a splendid destiny,
as the 88iJT8Qog jiAoijc; 1 to the denial of the Will. You
have also felt and experienced the chastening,
inwardly becalming, and bracing power of pain. This
has been a time during which you have yourself tested
the truth of Schopenhauer s doctrine. If the fourth
book of his principal work now makes a disagreeable,



The next best way. Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 27

gloomy, and tedious impression upon you; if it has
not the power to bear you triumphantly beyond all
the terrible outward pain into that sweetly melan
choly but happy mood which possesses us at the sound
of lofty music, into that mood in which one sees one s
earthly shell fall from one, then it is possible that
even I, too, may have nothing more to do with his
philosophy. Only he who is brimful of anguish can
pronounce the decisive judgment on such matters. We
others, standing in the middle of the stream of life
and things, and longing for the Denial of the Will
merely as for the island of the blest, cannot judge
whether the consolations of such a philosophy are
adequate for times of deep sorrow.



I conclude with a hearty farewell and a quotation
from Aristotle:



Your devoted and likewise stricken friend,

FRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE.



" For what is man? A token of weakness, the spoil of
time, the sport of fortune, the image of change, the plaything
of envy and chance." (The translator has been unable to trace
this passage in Aristotle.)



28 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Leipzig, February, 1867.
DEAR FRIEND:

If you are not in a mood to listen to a host of weird
things, just put this letter aside and reserve it for
another occasion.

Pious people believe that all the suffering and mis
haps that come their way have been sent to them with
the most careful premeditation, in order that this or
that thought, such and such a resolution or under
standing might be kindled in them. We lack the very
first principles on which such a faith is based. It
does lie in our pow r er, however, to suck every event,
every trivial or serious mishap, dry and to turn it to
account for our improvement and discipline. The pre
destined character of every individual s fate is no
myth if we understand it in this sense. What we
have to do is intentionally to turn our fate to account,
for events are, in themselves, but insignificant acces
sories to this end. It all turns upon our personal
attitude. An event has no more value than we choose
to invest it with. Thoughtless and unmoral people
know nothing of this purposefulness of fate. Events
make no lasting impression upon them. We, however,
wish to learn something from them, and the more our
knowledge of moral affairs increases and the more
complete it becomes, the more surely will the events
of our life link themselves up into a fast-bound ring,
or will at least seem to do so. You know, old man,
what I mean by these remarks.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 29

And now, with the expression of my mother s, my
cousin s and my own sincere sympathy, I will take
my leave of you for to-day.

Yours affectionately,

F. N.

To FEEIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, April 6, 1867.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

Heaven alone knows the cause of my long silence,
for I am never more thankful or more happy than
when your letters arrive to give me news of your do
ings and your spirits.

During the holidays I intend to make a written
record of my work on the sources of Diogenes Laertius,
though I am anything but far advanced. For your
amusement let me confess what it is that gives me the
most pain and trouble my German style ( not to men
tion my Latin ) . But I have come to an understanding
with my mother tongue, so foreign languages cannot
fail to follow suit. The scales have fallen from my
eyes; too long had I lived in stylistic innocence. The
categorical imperative, "Thou shalt and must write,"
has called me to my senses. Truth to tell, I made an
attempt I had never made since my Gymnasium days
namely, to write well and suddenly my pen seemed
to become paralyzed in my hand. I could do nothing
and felt very angry. Meanwhile my ears rang with
Lessing s, Lichtenberg s, and Schopenhauer s precepts
on style. It was a constant comfort to me to know
that these authorities were unanimous in declaring



30 SELECTED LETTERS OF

that to write well was a difficult matter, that no man
was born with a good style, and that in order to ac
quire the capacity one had to work hard and keep
one s nose to the grindstone. God forbid that I should
write again in such a wooden, dry style and with so
much logical tightlacing as I did in my Theognis essay,
for instance, on the cradle of which none of the Graces
ever lighted (on the contrary, it was more like the
distant booming of the cannon at Koniggratz). 1 It
would be hard indeed not to be able to write better
than this when one longs so ardently to do so. The
first thing to do is to let a number of bright and lively
spirits loose upon one s style; I must play upon it
as if it were a keyboard. But I must not play the
things I have learnt, but improvise freely, as freely
as possible, and yet with logic and beauty.

Secondly, I am disturbed by another wish. One of
my oldest Naumburg friends, Wilhelm Finder, is just
going in for his first Law examination you and I
know the qualms inseparable from such a time. But
what attracts me and even tempts me to follow suit
is not the examination itself, but the preparation for
it. How valuable and uplifting it must be to let all
the disciplined elements of one s science march past
one in the space of about six months, and thus obtain
for once a general view of the whole ! Is it not exactly
as if an officer, accustomed always to the mere drilling
of his company, were suddenly to behold in battle the
magnificent fruit his small efforts could bear? For



*A reference to the great battle fought between the Aus-
trians and the Prussians at this place about nine months before
this letter was written. Translator.



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 31

it cannot be denied that the uplifting general view
of antiquity is altogether lacking in most philosophers
because they stand too close to the picture and
examine a spot of oil instead of admiring and, what
is more, enjoying the broad and bold outlines of the
composition as a whole. When, I ask you, shall we
at last realize that pure enjoyment in our studies of
antiquity about which, alas ! we have so often talked?
Thirdly, the whole of our method of working is
horrible. The hundred and one books lying on the
table before me are only so many pincers consuming
all the vitality out of the nerve of independent
thought. I verily believe, old man, that with a bold
hand you have selected the best possible lot that is
to say, an active contrast, a reversed standpoint, an
absolutely different attitude towards life, mankind,
work, and duty. By this I do not mean to praise your
present calling, as such, but only in so far as it con
stitutes the negation of your former life, together with
its object and its point of view. Amid such contrasts
body and soul keep healthy, and none of those inevi
table morbid symptoms appear which in the scholar
are caused by a preponderance of intellectual, and,
in the clodhopper, by a preponderance of bodily exer
cise. Of course, the morbidity manifests itself dif
ferently in each. The Greeks were no scholars, but
neither were they brainless athletes. Are we, there
fore, necessarily bound to exercise a choice between
the one or the other way of living? Is it not possible
that with Christianity a division was made in this
realm of man s nature also, which the nation of har
mony knew nothing about? Ought not every scholar



32 SELECTED LETTERS OF

to blush at the thought of Sophocles, who, dis
tinguished as he was in the domain of the spirit, was
vet able to dance with grace and understood the art
of playing at ball? But we stand towards these things
as we stand towards life in general ; we readily recog
nize an evil condition, but we do not raise a finger
to get rid of it. And here I might easily begin a
fourth lamentation, but in the presence of my martial
friend I will refrain. For a warrior must be much
more nauseated by these jeremiads than a home-bird
like myself.

Incidentally I have just called to mind a recent
experience that offers a very good illustration of the
scholar s morbid symptoms. As such it might per
haps be hushed up, but it will amuse you because it
is nothing more than the translation of Schopen
hauer s essay "On Professors of Philosophy" into real
life.

In a certain town a young man endowed with quite
extraordinary intellectual gifts, particularly in the
direction of philosophical speculation, made up his
mind to obtain a Doctor s degree. With this object
in view, he gathered together the threads of his sys
tem "Concerning the Fundamental Delusion of Rep
resentation," which he had laboriously thought out
for years, and was very happy and proud at the result.
With these feelings surging in his breast, he submitted
the work to the Philosophical Faculty of the place,
which happened to be a university town. Two pro
fessors of philosophy had to give their opinion on his
production, and this is how they acquitted themselves
of the task: The first said that, though the work



PBIEDRIOH NIETZSCHE

showed undoubted intellectual power, it did not advo
cate the doctrines taught at his institution ; and the
second declared that not only did the views not cor
respond with the common understanding of mankind,
but they were also paradoxical. The work was con
sequently rejected, and its author did not receive his
Doctor s degree. Fortunately the rejected candidate
was not humble enough to recognize the voice of wis
dom in this verdict nay, he was sufficiently presump
tuous to maintain that this particular Philosophical
Faculty was lacking in the philosophical facultas.

In short, old man, one cannot pursue one s path too
independently. Truth seldom resides in the temple
men have built in her honour, or where priests have
been ordained to her service. The good work or the
rubbish we produce we alone have to pay for, not
those who have given us their good or their foolish
advice. Let us at least have the pleasure of scoring
our blunders off our own bat. There is no such thing
as a general recipe for the assistance of all men. One
must be one s own doctor and gather one s medical
experience on one s own body. As a matter of fact,
we give too little thought to our own welfare; our
egoism is not shrewd enough, our reason not selfish
enough.

With this, old man, let me now take my leave of
you. Unfortunately I have nothing "solid" or "real,"
or whatever the current phrase among young business
men is, to report; but you will certainly not regret
that.

Your devoted friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



34 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To FREIHEER KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, December 1, 1867.
DEAR FRIEND:

I am a bombardier in the second mounted division
of the Fourth Horse Artillery.

You may well imagine how astonished I was by
this revolution in my affairs, and what a violent up
heaval it has made in my everyday humdrum exist
ence. Nevertheless I have borne the change with de
termination and courage, and even derive a certain
pleasure from this turn of fortune. Now that I have
an opportunity of doing a little aaxrjai? I am more
than ever thankful to our Schopenhauer. For the
first five weeks I had to be in the stables. At
5.30 in the morning I had to be among the horses,
removing the manure and grooming the animals down
with the currycomb and horse brush. For the present
my work lasts on an average from 7 a. m. to 10 a. m.
and from 11.30 a. m. to 6 p. m., the greater part of
which I spend in parade drill. Four times a week
we two soldiers who are to serve for a year have to
attend a lecture given by a lieutenant, to prepare us
for the reserve officers examination. You must know
that in the horse artillery there is a tremendous
amount to learn. We get most fun out of the riding
lessons. My horse is a very fine animal, and I am
supposed to have some talent for riding. When I and
my steed gallop round the large parade ground, I
feel very contented with my lot. On the whole, too,

Athletic training. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 35

I am very well treated. Above all, we have a very
nice captain.

I have now told you all about my life as a soldier.
This is the reason why I have kept you waiting so
long for news and for an answer to your last letter.
Meanwhile, if I am not mistaken, you will probably
have been freed from your military fetters; that is
why I thought it would be best to address this letter
to Spandau.

But my time is already up; a business letter to
Volkmann and another to Ritschl have robbed me of
much of it. So I must stop in order to get ready for
the parade in full kit.

Well, old man, forgive my long neglect, and hold
the god of War responsible for most of it.
Your devoted friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,

Bombardier.

To ROHDE.

Naumburg, February 1-3, 1868.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

It is Saturday, and the day too is drawing to a
close. For a soldier the word "Saturday" is full of
magic charm and of a feeling of quiet and peace of
which as a student I had no idea. To be able to sleep
and dream peacefully, without one s soul being
taunted by the terrifying picture of the morrow; to
have overcome and done with another seven days of
that excitement in uniform which is called a year s
soldiering what simple and at the same time deep
joys such things awaken joys worthy of a cynic and



36 SELECTED LETTERS OF

attained by us almost too cheaply and easily. I now
understand that first and greatest Saturday afternoon
mood, in which that easy and satisfied phrase
jrdvta Mav xaXd 1 was pronounced; in which coffee
and a pipe were invented, and the first optimist
stepped into life. In any case, the Hebrews who
concocted and believed this beautiful story were
warriors or factory hands; they were certainly not
students ; for the latter would have proposed six days
holiday and one workday in the week, and in practice
would have converted even this into a holiday like the
rest. At all events, that was my practice ; and at the
present moment I feel the contrast between my pres
ent life and my former scientific loafing very strongly
indeed. If it were only possible to muster all the
philologists of ten years together and drill them army
fashion into the service of science, at the end of ten
years the science of philology would no longer be
necessary, because all the principal work would have
been done. And, moreover, it would no longer be pos
sible, because no man would join these colours volun
tarily, colours with which the idea of the "one-year
volunteer 5 cannot be associated at all.

As you see, a Saturday makes one talkative, because
we have to be silent all the rest of the week and are
accustomed to regulate the capacities of our souls ac
cording to our superior officer s word of command.
That is why on Saturdays, when the eye of the master
is removed, words gush forth from our lips and sen
tences pour out of the ink-pot especially when the



*See Genesis I., 31, "And God saw everything that he had
made and, behold, it was very good." Translator.



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 37

fire is crackling in the grate and outside you hear
the roar of a February storm, heavy with the promise
of Spring. Saturday, a storm, and a warm room
these are the best ingredients with which to brew the
punch of a "letter- writing mood." . .

My present life, my dear friend, is really very lonely
and friendless. It offers me no stimulation that I do
not myself provide ; none of that harmonious concord
of souls which many a happy hour in Leipzig used to
afford; but rather, enstrangement of the soul from
itself, preponderance of obsessional influences, which
draw the soul up tightly with a sense of fear, and
teach it to regard things with an earnestness that
they do not deserve. This is the seamy side of my
present existence, and you will certainly be able to
enter into my feelings about it. Let us, however, turn
it round the other way. This life is certainly uncom
fortable, but enjoyed as an entremets, absolutely use
ful. It makes a constant call on a man s energy and is
relished particularly as an dvriSoTOV 1 against para
lyzing scepticism, concerning the effects of which we
have observed a good deal together. Moreover, it helps
one to become acquainted with one s own nature,
as it reveals itself among strange and generally rough
people, without any assistance from science and
without that traditional goddess Fame which de
termines our worth for our friends and for society.
Up to the present I have remarked that people are
well disposed toward me, whether they happen to be
captains or plain gunners ; for the rest I do my duty

Antidote. Translator.



58 SELECTED LETTERS OF

with zeal and interest. Is it not something to be
proud of, to be regarded as the best rider among thirty
recruits? Verily, dear friend, that is more than a
philological prize, although I am not insensible even
to the kind of encomiums that the Faculty of Leipzig
thought fit to bestow upon me. . . .

Ah, my dear friend, what a child of misfortune
is a field artilleryman when he has literary tastes into
the bargain. Our old god of War loved young women,
not shrivelled old Muses. A gunner who often enough
in his barrack room sits upon a dirty stool meditating
upon Democritean problems, while his boots are being
polished for him, is really a paradox on whom the
gods must look with scorn. . . .

When I tell you that I am on duty every day from
7 in the morning to 5 in the evening, and that in ad
dition I have to attend lectures given by a lieutenant
and a vet respectively, you can imagine what a sorry
plight I am in. At night the body is limp and tired
and seeks its couch in good time. And so it goes on
without respite or rest, day after day. What becomes
of the reflection and contemplation necessary for sci
entific cogitation in the midst of it all?

Even for things which are still more dear to me
than my literary needs, for the delights of a friendly
correspondence and for art, I so seldom have a free
moment. Just let me be once more in full enjoyment
of my time and my strength

Si male nunc, non olim sic erit. 1



J If things are bad today, at some future time they may be

* T&gt; YI e-lo -frt^*



better. Translator



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 39

And next year I go to Paris.

Your devoted friend,

FB. NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, February 16, 1868.
DEAR FRIEND:

As I have already told you my military duties take
up much of my time, but they are on the whole tol
erable. I am still particularly fond of riding, and
my zeal for it is kept alive by the praise I receive on
all sides. From the officers I hear that I have a good
seat and thus make a good display. Believe me, old
man, I never thought I should have an opportunity
of growing vain about this sort of thing. Suffice it
to say that my desire to perfect myself in this fine but
difficult art is very strong indeed. If you should hap
pen to come to Naumburg for the Pforta School Fes
tival, you will be able to appreciate my achievements.
I am afraid you will have a good laugh when you
see me shouting my orders. But I still have a good
deal to learn before I can pass the officers exam.



Yours,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, June 22, 1868.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

To-day all my comrades in arms have left me. They
are on the way to Magdeburg for gun practice. So
I am about the only gay-coated creature within the



40 SELECTED LETTERS OF

walls of Naumburg an abandoned broken-winged
stork that with envy in its heart has seen all its more
powerful fellows fly right away. Yes, old man, the
rumour that has already reached you by many a tor
tuous path is for the best (i.e., the worst) part true:
I did not end my military career quite happily.

I had survived the winter and also the most difficult
and unpleasant half of my year s service; they had
made me a bombardier and were well pleased with my
behaviour. When the fine weather came and I was
able to ride my horse round the huge parade ground
I too was beginning to breathe more freely. Towards
the end I was riding the most restive and fiery animal
in the battery. One day I failed in attempting a
smart spring into the saddle ; I gave my chest a blow
on the pommel and felt a sharp rend in my left side.
But I quietly went on riding, and endured the in
creasing pain for a day and a half. On the evening
of the second day, however, I had two fainting fits,
and on the third day I lay as if nailed to my bed,
suffering the most terrible agony and with a high tem
perature. The doctors declared that I had torn two
of the muscles of my chest. In consequence of this
the whole system of chest muscles and ligaments was
inflamed, and severe suppuration had supervened ow
ing to the bleeding of the torn tissues. A week later,
when my chest was lanced, several cupfuls of matter
were removed. From that time onward, three whole
months, the suppuration has never ceased, and when
at last I left my bed, I was naturally so exhausted
that I had to learn to walk again. My condition was
lamentable; I had to be helped in standing, walking



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 41

and lying down, and could not even write. Gradually
my health improved, I enjoyed an invigorating diet,
took plenty of exercise and recovered my strength.
But the wound still remained open and the suppura
tion scarcely abated. At last it was discovered that
the sternum itself had been grazed and this was the
obstacle to recovery. One evening I got an undeniable
proof of this, in the form of a little piece of bone
which came out of the wound with the matter. This
has happened frequently since, and the doctor says
it is like to occur frequently again. Should a large
piece of bone be detached a slight operation would be
imperative. The trouble is by no means dangerous,
but it is exceedingly slow. The doctors can do noth
ing but help nature in her work of elimination and
fresh growth. In addition to this I make frequent in
jections of camomile tea and silver nitrate every day
and take a warm bath. Our staff doctor will shortly
pronounce me "temporarily disabled," and it is not
improbable that I may always suffer from some weak
ness round about the wound.

As soon as I was able to wield a pen again I
plunged once more into my studies, of which I send
you a sample in the enclosed little Dance Song.


. . . The day before yesterday at noon I reached
the pretentious little village spa called Wittekind



42 SELECTED LETTERS OF

It was raining hard and the flags that had been hung
out for the spa festival were looking limp and dirty.
My host, an unmistakable rogue with opaque blue
spectacles, came forward to meet me and conducted
me to the apartment I had engaged six days before.
Everything about this room, including an absolutely
mouldy sofa, was as desolate as a prison. I very soon
realized too that this same host employed only one
servant maid for two houses full of visitors which
probably means from twenty to forty people. Before
the first hour had elapsed I had a visit, but so dis
agreeable a one that I was only able to shake it off by
means of the most energetic courtesy. In short the
whole atmosphere of the place I had just entered was
chilly, damp and disagreeable.

Yesterday I took stock a bit of the place and its in
habitants. At table I had the good fortune to sit
near a deaf-and-dumb man and a number of extraor
dinary-shaped females. The place does not seem bad,
but one can go nowhere and see nothing owing to the
rain and the damp. Volkmann called and prescribed
the local baths for me. He also spoke of an operation
in the near future.

How grateful I am to you for having given me
Ehlert s book. 1 I read it on the first evening of my
stay reclining on the mouldy sofa in my wretchedly
lighted room, but it gave me much pleasure and
inner warmth. Unkind tongues might say the book
is written in an agitated and inferior style. But the
work of a musician cannot possibly be that of a man



This work is Louis Ehlert s Briefe iiber Musik an tine
Freundin. Translator,



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 43

who uses his eyes in art. At bottom it is music though
it happens to be written not in notes but in words.
A painter must experience the most painful sensations
on beholding all this confusion of images crowded
together without any method. But unfortunately I
have a weakness for the Paris feuilleton, for Heine s
Reisebilder, etc., and prefer a stew to roast-beef.
What pains it has cost me to pull a scientific face in
order to write down a jejune train of thought with
the requisite decency and alia breve. Your husband
can even sing a song about this (not to the tune it is
true of "Ach lieber Franz, nocli, yn etc.), for he was
very much surprised at the lack of "style." In the end
I felt like the sailor who feels less secure on land than
in a rocking ship. But perhaps I shall one day dis
cover a philological theme that will permit of musical
treatment, and then I shall splutter like a suckling
and heap up images like a barbarian who has fallen
asleep before an antique head of Venus, and still be
in the right in spite of the "flourishing speed" 2 of the
exposition.

And Ehlert is almost always right. But to many
men truth is irrecognizable in this harlequin garb.
To us who hold no page of life too serious to allow
of our sketching some joke in fleeting arabesque upon
it, this is not so. And which of the gods can feel any
surprise if we occasionally behave like satyrs and



This refers to a song beginning "Ach lieber Franz, nock
einen Tanz" that Professor Ritschl when he was in a cheerful
mood liked to sing in memory of his youth. Translator.

a An expression in Ehlert s book above mentioned. Trans
lator.



44 SELECTED LETTERS OF

parody a life that always looks so serious and pa
thetic and wears buskins?

If only I could manage to conceal my weakness
for dissonance from you ! Answer me frankly have
you not already a terrible sample of it? Here you
have a second. Wagner s and Schopenhauer s club
feet are difficult to conceal. But I shall improve. And
if ever you should allow me to play you something
again, I shall embody my memory of that beautiful
Sunday in tones, and then you will hear what you
only read to-day, to wit, what a tremendous deal that
memory means to a bad musician, etc.


At last I can give you absolutely reliable news of
my health and quite the best you could wish to hear.
A few days ago I returned quite recovered from the
baths at Wittekind, where I went in order to place
myself in the able and experienced hands of Prof.
Volkmann, the distinguished Halle surgeon. My regi
mental doctors were ood and candid enough to ad
vise me to consult this specialist, and after three
weeks of the Wittekind cure, the somewhat painful
healing process developed so favourably that Volk
mann congratulated me and said I should now recover
very quickly. In the end an operation was not neces
sary, although for a long while it had threatened to
be so. Just think, old man ! five months illness, much
tedious pain, profound bodily and spiritual depres-



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 45

sion, and desperate prospects for the future all this
has been overcome! All that remains to remind me
of my dangerous condition is a single deep scar over
the bone in the middle of my chest. Volkmann told
me that if the suppuration had lasted much longer
as it was it lasted three months my heart or my
lungs would probably have been affected.

It is obvious that I cannot resume my military
duties. I am pronounced "temporarily disabled," and
I hope, as I have been prevented from becoming an
officer of the Reserve, I shall contrive slowy and grad
ually to vanish from the list of those liable to serve.

Your devoted friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To ROHDE.

Naumburg, October 8, 1868.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

. . . Not long ago I was reading (and that at
first hand) Jahn s Essays on Music, as well as his
essays on Wagner. A certain amount of enthusiasm
is required to do justice to such a man, but Jahn
shows instinctive repugnance and listens with his
ears half closed. Nevertheless I agree with him in
many respects, particularly when he says he regards
Wagner as the representative of a modern dilettant
ism which is sucking up and digesting all art inter
ests. But it is precisely from this point of view that
one cannot cease wondering at the magnitude of each
artistic gift in this man and his inexhaustible energy
coupled with such a versatility of artistic talent. For



46 SELECTED LETTERS OF

as to "culture", the more variegated and extensive it
happens to be, the more lifeless is usually the eye,
the weaker are the legs and the more effete are the
brains that bear it.

Wagner has, moreover, a range of feeling which lies
far beyond Jahn s reach. Jahn remains a "Grenz-
lote" 1 hero, a healthy man, to whom the Tannhauser
saga and the atmosphere of Lohengrin are a closed
book. My pleasure in AVagner is much the same as
my pleasure in Schopenhauer the ethical air, the
redolence of Faust, and also of the Cross death and
the tomb. . . .

Your old friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,

Prussian Gunner.

To ROHDE.

Leipzig, November 9, 1868.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

To-day I intend to relate a whole host of sprightly
experiences, to look merrily into the future and to
conduct myself in such idyllic and easy fashion that
your sinister guest that feline fever will arch its
back and retire spitting and swearing. And in order
that all discordant notes may be avoided I shall dis
cuss the famous res set-era 2 which is responsible for
your second letter on a special sheet of paper, so that



l Grenzbote (frontier messenger) is the title of a review
published in Leipzig. Its editor and contributors acquired the
nickname of Gesunden (healthy ones) owing to their attitude
of indifference to the more subtle manifestations of imagina
tive genius. Translator.

"Serious thing." Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 47

you will be able to read it when you are in the right
mood and place for it.

The acts of my comedy are : ( 1 ) A Club-night or the
Assistant Prof essor ; (2) The Ejected Tailor; (3) A
Rendezvous with X. Some old women take part in
the performance. . . .

At home I found two letters, yours and an invita
tion from Curtius, whom I am glad to get to know
better. When two friends like us write letters to
each other, it is well known- that the angels rejoice.
And they rejoiced as* I read your letter aye, they
even giggled. . . .

When I reached home yesterday I found a card
addressed to me with this note upon it: "If you
would like to meet Richard Wagner, come to the
Theatre Cafe at a quarter to four. Windisch".

Forgive me, but this news so turned my head that
I quite forgot what I was doing before it came, and
was thoroughly bewildered.

I naturally ran there and found our loyal friend,
who gave me a lot of fresh information. Wagner
was staying in Leipzig with his relations in the strict
est incognito. The press had no inkling of his visit
and all Brockhaus s servants were as dumb as graves
in livery. Now Wagner s sister, Frau Brockhaus,
that determined and clever woman, had introduced
her friend Frau Ritschl to her brother, and on this
occasion was able proudly to boast of the friend to
the brother and of the brother to the friend, the
lucky creature! Wagner played the Meisterlied,
which you must know, in Frau RitschPs presence, and
this good lady told him that she already knew the



48 SELECTED LETTERS OF

song very well, mea opera. 1 Imagine Wagner s joy
and surprise! And with the utmost readiness in the
world he graciously declared his willingness to meet
me incognito. I was to be invited on Friday evening.
Windisch, however, pointed out that I should be pre
vented from coming by my official post and duties,
Saturday afternoon was accordingly proposed. On
that day Windisch and I ran to the Brockhaus s,
found the Professor s family but no Wagner. He
had just gone out with an enormous hat on his huge
head. It was thus that I made the acquaintance of
the excellent family and received a kind invitation for
Sunday evening.

On these days I felt as though I was living in a
novel, and you must allow that in view of the inac
cessibility of the exceptional man, the circumstances
leading up to this acquaintance were somewhat ro
mantic.

As I was under the impression that a large com
pany of guests had been invited, I -decided to dress
very ceremoniously, and was glad that my tailor had
promised to deliver a new dress suit for this very
evening. It was a horrid day with constant showers
of rain and snow. One shuddered at the thought of
leaving the house, and I was therefore very pleased
when little Roscher paid me a visit in the afternoon
to tell me something about the Eleatics and about
God in philosophy for, as candidandu$ he is work
ing up the material collected by Ahrens in his "De
velopment of the Idea of God up to the Time of Aris-



Through my offices." Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 49

totle" while Roinundt is trying for the prize essay
of the University, the subject of which is "On the
Will". It was getting dark, the tailor did not turn
up, and Roscher left me. I accompanied him,
called on the tailor myself, and found his minions
busily engaged on my clothes, which they promised
to send round in three-quarters of an hour.

I went on my way in a jolly mood, looked in at
Kintschy s, read the Kladderadatsch, and was amused
to find a paragraph saying that Wagner was in Swit
zerland and. that a fine house was being built for him
in Munich, while I knew all the time that I was going
to see him that evening and that the day before he had
received a letter from the little monarch 1 addressed
to "The Great German Tone-poet, Richard Wagner."

But at home there was no tailor awaiting me, so I
sat down and read the- treatise on the Eudokia at my
ease, but was constantly disturbed by the sound of a
shrill bell that seemed to be ringing some distance
away. At last I felt certain that someone was stand
ing at the old. iion gate; it was shut, as was also the
door of the house. I shouted across the garden to the
man to enter the house; but it was impossible to make
oneself understood through the pouring rain. The
whole house was disturbed, the door was ultimately
opened, and a little old man bearing a parcel came
up to me. It was half-past 6, time for me to dress
and get ready, as I lived a long way off. It was all
right, the man had my things. I tried them on and
they fitted. But what was this suspicious develop-

J Ludwig II of Bavaria.



50 SELECTED LETTERS OF

ment? He actually presented me with a bill. I took
it politely, but he declared he must be paid on deliv
ery. I was surprised, and explained that I had noth
ing to do with him as the servant of my tailor, but
that my dealings were with his master to whom I had
given the order. The man grew more pressing, as
did also the time. I snatched at the things and began
to put them on. He snatched them too and did all he
could to prevent me from- dressing. What with vio
lence on my part and violence on his, there was soon
a scene, and all the time I was fighting in my shirt,
as I wished to get the new trousers.

At last, after a display of dignit} r , solemn threats 3
the utterance of curses on my tailor and his accom
plice, and vows of vengeance, the little man vanished
with my clothes. End of the First Act. I sat on my
sofa and meditated while I examined a black coat and
wondered whether it was good enough for Richard.

Outside the rain continued to pour.

It was a quarter past 7. I had promised to
meet Windisch at half -past 7 at the Theatre Cafe.
I plunged into the dark and rainy night, also a little
man in black and without evening dress, yet in a bea
tific mood, for chance was in my favour even the
scene with the tailor s man had something tremen
dously unusual about it.

At last we entered Frau Brockhaus s exceedingly
comfortable drawing-room. There was nobody there
except the nost intimate members of the family, Rich
ard and us two. I was introduced to Wagner and
muttered a few respectful words to him. He ques
tioned me closelv as to how I had become so well ac-



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 51

quainted with his music, complained bitterly about
the way his operas were produced with the exception
of the famous Munich performances, and made great
fun of the conductors who tried to encourage their
orchestra in friendly tones as follows : "Now, gentle
men, let s have some passion! My good people, still
a little more passion if you please !" Wagner enjoys
imitating the Leipzig dialect.

Now let me give you a brief account of all that
happened that evening. Really the joys were of such
a rare and stimulating kind that even to-day I am
not back in the old groove, but can think of nothing
better to do than come to you, my dear friend, to tell
you these wonderful tidings. Wagner played to us
before and after supper, and went through every one
of the more important passages of the Mcistersinger.
He imitated all the voices and was in very high spir
its. He is, by the bye, an extraordinarily energetic
and fiery man. He speaks very quickly and wittily,
and can keep a private company of the sort assembled
on that evening very jolly. I managed to have quite
a long talk with him about Schopenhauer. Oh, and
you can imagine what a joy it was for me to hear him
speak with such indescribable warmth of our master
what a lot we owed to him, how he was the only
philosopher who had understood the essence of music !
Then he inquired as to how the professors were dis
posed toward him; laughed a good deal about the
Philosophers Congress at Prague, and spoke of them
as philosophical footmen. Later on he read me a
piece out of the autobiography he is now writing, a
thoroughly amusing scene from his Leipzig student



52 SELECTED LETTERS OF

days which I still cannot recall without a laugh. He
writes extraordinarily cleverly and intellectually. At
the close of the evening, when we were both ready to
go, he shook my hand very warmly and kindly asked
me to come and see him so that we might have some
music and philosophy together. He also entrusted
me with the task of making his music known to his
sister and his relations, a duty which I undertook very
solemnly to fulfil. You will hear more about it when
I have succeeded in looking at this evening more ob
jectively and from a greater distance. For the time
being a hearty farewell and best wishes for your
health from yours, F. N.

To ROHDE.
Leipzig on the Day of Penance,

November 20, 1868.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

Now that I can once more contemplate the teeming
brood of philologists of our day at close quarters ; now
that I am obliged daily to observe the whole of their
mole-hill activity, their swollen cheek pouches, their
blind eyes, their rejoicing over the captured worm
and their indifference towards the true nay, the ob
vious problems of life, and remember that I notice
these characteristics not only in the young brood, but
also in their venerable elders, I grow ever more clear
ly convinced that we two, if we wish to remain true
to our genius, will not be able to pursue our life task
without causing much offence, and being constantly
thwarted and crossed in our purpose. When the
philologist and the man are not of one piece, the whole



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 53

tribe above mentioned gapes in astonishment at the
miracle ; it grows angry and finally scratches, growls,
and bites. You have just experienced an example of
this. For of this I am quite certain, that the trick you
have been played was not directed at your work in
particular, but at your individuality. And I, too, live
in hope of having very soon a foretaste of what awaits
me in this infernal atmosphere. But, my good man,
what have the judgments of other people concerning
our personalities to do with our achievements? Let
us remember Schopenhauer and Richard Wagner, and
the inexhaustible energy with which they maintained
their belief in themselves in the face of protests from
the whole of the "cultured" world, and even if we are
not allowed to refer them to deos maximos* we still
have the consolation of knowing that however odd one
is one cannot be denied the right to existence, and
that two such odd creatures as ourselves who under
stand each other so well and are so deeply united
must be a delightful spectacle for the gods.

Finally, nothing could be more regrettable than the
fact that precisely at this moment, when we have just
begun to put our views of life to a practical test, and
explore all things and all circumstances in turn men,
states, studies, world histories, churches, schools,
etc. with our antennae, we should be separated by
miles of territory, and each should be left alone with
the semi-enjoyable and semi-painful feeling of having
to digest his outlook on the world in solitude. As a
matter of fact nothing would have been more exhila-

" The biggest of Gods." Translator.



54 SELECTED LETTERS OF

rating than to sit down together now, as we used to do,
to digest our bodily meals together at Kintschy s, and
symbolically drink our afternoon coffee in company,
and, from this midday of our lives, glance backwards
into the past and forwards into the future.

However, it will not be too late to do this even in
Paris, where the great dvayvcoQimg 1 of our comedy
takes place, and upon the most beautiful scene in the
world, too, between the most brilliant wings and in
numerable glittering supers.

Oh, how lovely this image is!

Therefore avaunt unadorned reality, shamefully
vulgar empiricism, credit and debit, and "Grenzbo-
ten" sobriety ! no, let the whole of this letter be pre
sented to my friend, with all my soul, as a solemn
and lofty greeting!

( He drinks the contents of the ink bottle. ) Chorus
of the Ascetics :

Selig der Liebende,
Der die betrubende,
Heilsam und ubende
Priifung bestanden."

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, April 13, 1869.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

My hour has come and this is the last evening I
shall spend at home for some time. Early to-morrow
morning I go out into the wide, wide world, to enter

1 Unravelment.

- Blessed be the loving friend who has passed the trying
but wholesome and toilsome exam." Goethe s Faust, I, Act 5.
Translator.



FEIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 55

a new and untried profession, in an atmosphere heavy
and oppressive with duty and work. Once more I
must take leave of everything, the golden time of free
and unconstrained activity, in which every instant is
sovereign, in which the joys of art and the world are
spread out before us as a mere spectacle in which we
scarcely participate. This time is now for ever in the
past for me. Now the inexorable goddess "Daily
Duty" rules supreme. "Bemooster Bursche zieh? ich
aus!" 1 [As a moss-grown student I go out into the
world.] But you know that touching student song of
course! "Muss selber nun Philister sein!" 2 [I too
must be a Philistine now.] In one way or another
this line always comes true. One cannot take up posts
and honours with impunity the only question is,
are the fetters of iron or of thread? For I have the
pluck which will one day perhaps enable me to burst
my bonds and venture into this precarious life from
a different direction and in a different way. As yet
I see no sign of the inevitable humpback of the pro
fessor. May Zeus and all the Muses preserve me from
ever becoming a Philistine, an av&Qcojrog apioixTog 8 ,
a man of the herd. But I do not know how I could
become one, seeing that I am not one. It is true I
stand a little nearer to another kind of Philistine
the Philistine of the "specialist" species; for it is only
natural that the daily task, and the unremitting con
centration of the mind upon certain specified subjects



*A song sung by German students on leaving the Univer
sity. Translator.

a Another line of the same song. Translator.

A man who takes no interest in the Muses or Arts.
Translator.



56 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and problems, should tend to abate the free receptiv
ity of the mind and undermine the philosophic sense.
But I flatter myself that I shall be able to meet this
danger with more calm and assurance than the ma
jority of philologists. Philosophical seriousness is
already too deeply rooted in me; the true and essen
tial problems of life and thought have been too clearly
revealed to me by that great mystagogue, Schopen
hauer, to allow of my ever being obliged to dread such
a disgraceful defection from the "Idea". To infuse
this new blood into my science, to communicate to my
pupils that Schopenhauerian earnestness which is
stamped on the brow of the sublime man such is my
desire, such is my undaunted hope. I should like to
be something more than a mere trainer of efficient
philologists. The present generation of teachers, the
care of the coining generation all this is in my mind.
If we must live our lives out to the bitter end let us
at least do so in such wise that others may bless our
life as a priceless treasure, once we have been happily
released from its tolls.

As for you, old man, with whom I agree on such a
number of vital and fundamental questions, I wish
you the luck you deserve and myself your old and
tried friendship. Fare thee well !

FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, DR.

To ROHDE.

Badenweiler, August 17, 1869.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

This is the last day of the holidays. Feelings long
since dead and buried seem to wake again. I feel just



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 57

like a fourth-form boy who waxes sentimental and
writes poems about the ephemeral character of earth
ly happiness when he hears the clock strike on the last
day of the holidays. Oh, dear friend, what a small
amount of joy is mine and what a lot of my own
smoke I have to consume ! Aye, I wouldn t fear even
an attack of that dreadful dysentery if by means of it
I could purchase a talk with you every evening. How
unsatisfactory letters are! Incidentally I discovered
the following beautiful passage in old Goethe yester
day:

"How precious is the dear and certain speech
Of the present friend! The Solitary,
Robbed of its power benign, sinks into gloom;
Too slowly ripens, then locked in his breast,
Thought and each firm resolve ; but in the presence
Of the beloved friend they leap to life!" 1

You see, that s the whole thing: we are in eternal
need of midwives, and with the view of being confined
most men go into the public house or to a "colleague,"
and then the little thoughts and little plans romp out
like kittens. When, however, we are pregnant and
there is no one at hand to assist us in our difficult
delivery, then darkly and gloomily we lay our rude,
unformed, newborn thought in the murky recess of
some cave; the sunny rays of friendship are denied
it.

But with my incessant talk about solitude, I shall
soon develop into a regular Joseph, the carpenter, and
then no kind Mary will wish to join her lot with mine.
"The calf and the baby ass, men say, do praise the

Goethe: Iphigenia, Act. IV .Translated by Hermann
Scheffauer.



58 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Lord most perfectly." There s the whole thing! A
little cattle makes the whole world kin, the edifice
is crowned. Remember it was the shepherds and the
sheep who saw the stars; to people like us everything
is dark. . . .

Now let nie tell you something about my Jupiter,
Richard Wagner, to whom I go from time to time for
a breath of air, and receive more refreshment by so do
ing than any of my colleagues could possibly imagine.
The fellow has not received a single honour yet, and
has only just had the distinction of being elected hon
orary member of the Berlin Academy of Arts. A
fruitful, rich and convulsive life, distinctly unheard
of and deviating from the average standard of morals.
But that is precisely why he stands there, firmly
rooted in his own power, with his eyes always scan
ning a distance beyond everything ephemeral, and be
yond his age in the finest sense. Not long ago ha
handed me the MS. of "State and Religion," intended
as a memoire for the young King of Bavaria. It is
conceived on such a high plane, is so independent of
time, and so full of nobility and Schopenhauerian
earnestness that it made me feel I should like to be
a king in order to receive such exhortations. By-the-
bye, a little while ago I sent him one or two passages
out of your letters for Frau von Billow, who had often
asked me for them. On my last visit but one a baby
boy w r as born during the night and was called "Sieg
fried." The last time I was there Wagner had just
completed the composition of his Siegfried, and was
full of the exuberance of his power. Aren t you going
to write to him? Perhaps you think he has more



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 59

than enough lay admirers. But do not write as a
musician ; write as a man who is in sympathy with his
thoughts and is as earnest as he is. He very rarely
gets a sign of this sort, and every time he does happen
to he is as delighted as if he had had a windfall. . . .
Farewell, my dear, true friend.

FRIED. NIETZSCHE.



NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Bale, Monday Evening, August 30, 1869.
DEAR MOTHER:

I have just returned from an exceedingly enjoyable
and harmonically happy visit of two days to my friend
Wagner and am reminded that I owe you an answer
as well as thanks for two letters. Above all I am de
lighted to hear that you are sure to come in the au
tumn, but you have formed an exaggerated opinion of
the all too modest space at my disposal in my new
quarters if you think I shall be able to put you both
up. I shall however do my best to make arrange
ments for you to live quite close to me, perhaps even
in the same house. This would be quite possible if
my colleague Schonberg moves, as he intends to do,
at the right time. Then his rooms would be free.
We are now very busy again and regularly so. As
soon as the term is over and I am quite free, I think
we shall make our way together to the charming Lake
of Geneva and eat as many grapes as we like, but not
medicinallv like the Grand-duchess. 1



The Grand-duchess Constantine had been a pupil of our

father s. E.F.N,



60 SELECTED LETTERS OF

As you seem to be interested in her meeting with
me, I must add that it made quite a favourable im
pression upon me. She seems to have received a
sound and liberal education ; she shows marked signs
of having a good intellect and an earnest grasp
of life, which is certainly not rare in royal person
ages and is quite comprehensible in view of the bur
dens of their position. She has moreover a friendly,
accessible and engaging manner, and does not suffer
from a desire to be constantly standing on ceremony.
I received her as you suggested. I met her at the
railway station with a bouquet, escorted her on foot
across the Rhine bridge and then as far as her hotel
in a carriage. I then had dinner with her and her
suite she has engaged 21 rooms. So I was in her
company in all about two or three hours and for a
good part of that time alone with her. During that
time she told me a good deal about old days and
recent ones as well; for instance, a lot about you,
how Lizzie had grown so thin at Leipzig, and whether
she drank cow s milk now, etc., etc. The ladies in
waiting were also quite attentive to me and proved
kind and cheerful creatures. One is at a great advan
tage when one s attitude towards royal personages
is quite independent and one has no requests or ap
peals to lay before them. Why did Lizzie tremble
so on the occasion of her first visit and behave in such
a nervous way? I would not say that I had been em
barrassed by the whole affair, but I regretted the time
lost.

The Grand-duchess revealed a strong taste for mu
sic and thought over the proximity of Tribschen and



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 61

Richard Wagner a good deal. She asked me to con
vey to him her deep regard for his work.

Never have I been happier than during the last few
days. The warm, hearty and increasing intimacy with
Wagner and Fran von Billow, the complete agreement
between us on all the questions that chiefly interest
us, Wagner absolutely in the prime of his genius
and marvellous creations only just come into being,
glorious Tribschen arranged on such a regal and in
genious scale many things conspire to exhilarate me
and strengthen me in my calling.

Good-bye! F. N.

To ROHDE.

Bale, End of January to February 15, 1870.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

I suddenly began to feel anxious the other day. I
am wondering how you are getting on in Rome, and
thinking how remote from the world and isolated your
life there must be. You may even be ill and are
receiving no proper care and no friendly support.
Set my fears at rest and dispel my pessimistic fan
cies. I always imagine Rome of the Christian Coun
cils as a terribly poisonous place no, I shall not write
any more; for I have a feeling that the secrecy of a
letter is not sufficiently secure for the discussion of
ecclesiastical and Jesuitical matters. They might
scent what the contents of the letter were, and pay
you out for it. You are studying antiquity and lead
ing the life of the Middle Ages.

Now let me impress this upon you most emphati
cally don t forget on your return journey to come



63 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and spend some time with me. Perhaps, you know,
it might be the last time for many years. I miss you
terribly, so give me the comfort of your presence
and try to make your stay not too short a one. For
it is indeed a new experience for me to have no one
on the spot to whom I can tell all the best and the
worst that life brings me not even a really sym
pathetic colleague. In such anchoritic conditions
and with such difficult years in a young life, my
friendship is actually becoming something pathologi
cal. I beg you, as an invalid begs : "Come to Bale !"

My real refuge, which cannot be valued too highly,
is still Triebschen, near Lucerne. The only thing is
I can but seldom have recourse to it. I spent my
Christmas holidays there, most beautiful and uplift
ing memory ! It is absolutely necessary that you too
should be initiated into this magic. When once you
are my guest we shall go and visit our friend Wagner
together. Can t you tell me anything about Franz
Liszt? If you could possibly manage to come home
via Lake Como you would have a fine opportunity of
giving us all great pleasure. We, i.e., we Triebschen
folk, have our eye on a villa on the lake near Fiume
Latte. It is called "Valla Capuana," and consists
of two houses. Could you manage to inspect this
villa and give us the benefit of your opinion? .

I have delivered a lecture on "The Ancient Musical
Drama" before a mixed audience, and on Feb. 1st I
shall deliver a second on "Socrates and Tragedy."
Every day I get to like the Hellenic world more and
more. There is no better way of approaching close to
it than that of indefatigably cultivating one s own



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 63

little self. The degree of culture I have attained con
sists in a most mortifying admission of my own ignor
ance. The life of a philologist striving in every direc
tion of criticism and yet a thousand miles away from
Greek antiquity becomes every day more impossible
to me. I even doubt whether I shall ever succeed in
becoming a proper philologist. If I cannot succeed
incidentally, as it were, I shall never succeed. The
trouble of it is that I have no example and am in the
dangerous position of the fool who acts on his own
responsibility. My plan for the immediate future is
four years of work in cultivating myself and then a
year of travel, in your company perhaps. Our life
is really a very difficult one. Sweet ignorance led by
teachers and traditions was so blissfully secure.

Moreover you will be well-advised not to choose
a small University in which to settle down. One is
isolated even in one s science. What would I not give
for you and me to be able to live together! I am al
most forgetting how to speak. But the most irksome
feature of my life is that I must always be impersonat
ing or representing somebody, either the teacher, the
philologist, or the man, and that I have always to be
gin by proving my mettle to all whom I frequent. I
am, however, a very bad hand at this, and get steadily
worse as time goes on. I either remain dumb or in
tentionally only say as much as- a polite man of the
world is expected to say. In short, I am more dis
satisfied with myself than with the world, and feel
therefore all the more attached to the dearest of
friends.

Farewell ! Farewell !



04 SELECTED LETTERS OF
NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Sulz, near Weissenburg, in the Neighbour
hood of Worth, August 28, 1870.

TO BEGIN WITH, HEARTY GREETINGS :

We have already been two days on the journey from
Erlangen: it takes longer than one thinks, although
we lay claim to every means of conveyance to hand,
and entered France, for instance, sitting on the breaks
of an enormous supply train. Yesterday, on a march
lasting eleven hours, we performed our errands at
Gorsdorf and Langensulzbach, and on the battlefield
of Worth. Under separate cover I am sending you a
souvenir of the terribly devastated battlefield, strewn
with countless sad remains and smelling strongly of
corpses. To-day we want to go to Hagenau, to-mor
row to Nancy, and so on, in the direction of the South
ern Army. Mosengel and I are travelling alone and
shall only rejoin Ziemssen, our Erlangen colleague, at
Pont-k-Mousson.

No letters from you can possibly reach me for the
next few weeks, as we are constantly changing our
position, and the letter post is exceedingly slow. Noth
ing" can be gleaned here of the progress of our army,
all papers having completely ceased. The enemy pop
ulation here seems to be growing used to the new state
of affairs. But of course it should be remembered
that they are threatened with death for the smallest
offence.

In all the villages through which we have passed
one sees hospital after hospital.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 65

I shall soon send you further news. Don t be in
the least anxious on my account.

YOUE FRITZ.



NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Erlangen, September 11, 1870.
Hotel Walfisch.

DEAREST MOTHER :

Just think until now I have had no news of you,
but my campaign has already come to an end without
mishap. Not quite without mishap, perhaps, for I
am lying here suffering from severe dysentery : but the
worst symptoms are over 1 and on Tuesday or Wed
nesday I shall be able to travel to Naumburg to be
nursed back to health again. And now as regards
this, I should like you and Lizzie, if you possibly can,
to return to Naumburg. What with my longing for
peace and quiet and the exhausted state I am in, there
is no other place to which I should like to go. I went
as far as the outskirts of Metz and conducted a trans
port of wounded from there to Carlsruhe. And as the
result of this, the terrible state of all the wounded
in my hands, the constant bandaging of their septic
wounds, and sleeping in a cattle truck in which six
severely wounded men lay on straw, I contracted the
germ of dysentery. The doctor discovered that I was
suffering from diphtheria as well, which is also the



J He was so ill that the parson had come to prepare him
for the end; he did not wish to tell us this, however. He always
maintained that he had had cholera. E.F.N.



66 SELECTED LETTERS OF

outcome of this journey. This is another of the evils
we are combating with the utmost vigour.

In spite of it all I am glad at least to have been
able to help a little in the midst of all the incredible
misery. And I should have returned to my duties
immediately if illness had not made this impossible.

With heartiest greetings and wishes,

YOUR SON.
F. N.

TO RlTSCHL.

Naumburg, September 21, 1870.
DEAR SIR:

Who can tell whether you have received my last
letters ! This is the secret qualm which at such times
as these seizes every letter writer. That is why I
will tell you once again that in the service of the vol
untary ambulance corps I went from Erlangen to the
seat of war as far as Ars-sur-Moselle (quite close to
Metz), and that I brought a transport of wounded
from there to Carlsruhe. The strain of the whole
undertaking was considerable and I am still strug
gling against the recollection of all I saw during
those weeks, as well as against an incessant wail of
which I cannot rid my mind s ear. On my return I
was laid up with two dangerous diseases caught from
the seriously wounded men I had nursed unremitting
ly for all those days and nights diphtheria and dys
entery alas! noMle par fratrum! 1



What a noble pair of brothers." Translator.



FRIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 67

However, I have got over the worst of both these
maladies. A few days ago I arrived here in Naum-
burg with the view of recuperating thoroughly and of
recovering by means of peaceful work from the stress
and fatigue I had undergone. It is a funny thing that
in spite of one s best intentions for the general weal
one s own paltry personality with all its wretchedness
and weakness comes and trips one up. Once more,
alas!

I hope shortly to be able to give you an account
of my experiences in person, and I am also bringing
you one or two chassepot bullets picked up on the
battlefields. All my martial passions have been kin
dled once more and I have been unable to gratify
them. Had I joined my battery I might have been
an active or passive witness of the events at Rezon-
ville, Sedan and Laon. But the neutrality of Swit
zerland tied my hands.

. . . But when have we been able to walk more
proudly than at present? Surely when German meets
German now they can laugh as well as cry together
like two augurs !

And this we shall do together next week. Au re-
voir!

Your devoted,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Naumburg, October 20, 1870.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

This morning I had a most pleasant surprise and
release from much anxiety and uneasiness your let-



68 SELECTED LETTERS OF

ter. Only the day before yesterday I received the
most terrible shock on hearing your name pronounced
in faltering accents at Pforta. You know what these
faltering accents mean just now. I immediately
begged the Rector to give me the list of old Pforta boys
who had fallen in the war, and this document reached
me yesterday evening. In one important respect it
reassured me. Otherwise it was a sad record. In ad
dition to the names you have already mentioned, I find
at the head of the list Stockert, then Von Oertzen
(though his name has a question mark against it),
then Von Riedesel, etc., sixteen in all. I was deeply
moved by all you told me, above all by the sincerity
and gravity with which you speak of the trial by fire
to which the philosophy we hold in common has been
subjected. I, too, have had a similar experience, and
in my case, as well, these months have been a period
during which I have been able to prove how deep
and firm are the roots our fundamental doctrine has
struck in me. One can die with it this is much more
than saying that one can live with it. For I have
not been so securely removed from the dangers of
the war as you might imagine. As soon as it was de
clared I applied to my Governing Board for leave to
discharge my duty as a German soldier. They granted
me leave but stipulated that in view of Switzerland s
neutrality I was on no account to bear arms. ( Since
1869 I have ceased to be a Prussian citizen.) With
out delay, therefore, I set out with an excellent friend
with the object of offering myself as a volunteer am
bulance attendant. This friend, who shared all my
experiences for seven weeks, is the painter Mosengel



PRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 69

of Hamburg, a man whom I must introduce to you as
soon as peace is restored. Without his hearty assist
ance I should probably not have survived the events
of this period. At Erlangen I attended the Univer
sity lectures in order to be trained in medicine and
surgery; we had 200 wounded there. In a very few
days I was given charge of two Prussians and two
Turcos. Two of these very soon contracted hospital
gangrene, and I had to do a lot of painting. At the
end of a fortnight Mosengel and I were sent out by
a Red Cross Society there. We were intrusted with
a host of personal messages and also with large sums
of money to be handed to about eighty field chaplains
already dispatched to the seat of war. Our plan was
to join my colleague Ziemssen at Pont-&-Mousson,
and to throw in our lot with his band of fifteen young
men. As a matter of fact, however, this plan was not
realized. We met with great difficulties in discharg
ing our various commissions, for, as we had no ad
dresses, we were obliged, at considerable pains and
with only the most inadequate directions to guide us,
to go from battlefield to battlefield and scour the hos
pitals of Weissenburg and the field hospitals of
Worth, Hagenau, Luneville, and Nancy, all the way
to Metz. At Ars-sur-Moselle a number of wounded
soldiers were placed in our care, and as they had to be
conveyed to Carlsruhe, we returned with them. I had
charge of six very seriously wounded men single-
handed for three days and three nights ; Mosengel had
five. The weather was atrocious and the goods trucks
we were in had to be almost closed up to prevent the
poor invalids from getting soaked through. The air



70 SELECTED LETTERS OF

in these trucks was simply unspeakable and to make
matters worse two of my patients had dysentery and
two others diphtheria. In short I had an incredible
amount to do and spent three hours in the morning
and three at night dressing wounds alone. In addition
to that, I could get no rest at night owing to my
patients continual need of me. After I had delivered
up my charges to a stationary hospital I fell very ill
myself and quickly developed a severe attack of dysen
tery and diphtheria. I reached Erlangen with great
difficulty and there I laid up. Mosengel was self-sac
rificing enough to nurse me there a no small under
taking considering the nature of my malady. After
I had been dosed with opium and injections of tannin
and silver nitrate for several days, the worst danger
was over. In a week I was able to travel to Naum-
burg, but I am not right yet. Besides, the atmosphere
of my experiences had spread like a gloomy mist all
about me, and for some time I never ceased to hear
the plaintive cries of the wounded. It was therefore
quite impossible to pursue my plan of returning to the
seat of war, and now I must be content with watching
and pitying from a distance.

Oh, my dear friend, what good wishes can I send
you ! We both know what we have to expect from life.
But we must not live for ourselves alone. So live on !
live on! dearest friend, and fare you well! I know
your heroic nature. Oh, if only you could be spared
to me!

Your devoted friend,
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE (now in Bale for good).



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 71

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Bale, November 7, 1870.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

Yesterday I had a treat which I should have liked
you of all people to share. Jacob Burckhardt 1 gave a
free lecture on "Historical Greatness," which was
quite in keeping with our thought and feeling. This ex
ceedingly original old man, although not given to dis
tortion, is yet inclined to hush up the truth. But on
our confidential walks he calls Schopenhauer "our
philosopher." Every week I attend one of his lectures
on the Study of History, and I believe I am the only
one of his sixty listeners who grasps the profundity
of his line of thought with its curious breaks and
twists at any point where the subject threatens to be
come dangerous. For the first time in my life I have
enjoyed a lecture, but then it was the sort of one I
myself might give when I am older.

This summer I wrote an essay on the "Dionysian
Weltanschauung" dealing with an aspect of Greek an
tiquity of which, thanks to our philosopher, we are
now able to get a much closer view. But these are
studies which, for the time being only, concern me.
I have no greater wish than to be allowed sufficient
time to mature properly and then out of my plenitude
produce something.

As regards the conditions of culture in the imme
diate future, I feel the deepest misgivings. If only we

lr rhe famous Bale Professor, author of The Renaissance in
Italy, etc.



72 SELECTED LETTERS OF

are not forced to pay too dearly for this huge national
success in a quarter where I at least refuse to suffer
any loss. Between ourselves, I regard the Prussia of
to-day as a power full of the greatest dangers for
culture. One day I shall myself publicly expose our
scholastic organization ; as to the religious, intrigues
which are once more spreading from Berlin to the
advantage of the Catholic Church I leave that to
others! At times it is very hard, but we must be
philosophical enough to keep our presence of mind in
the midst of all this intoxication, so that no thief may
come to rob or steal from us what the greatest mili
tary feats or the highest national exaltation would
in my opinion never replace.

Much fighting will be necessary for the coming pe
riod of culture, and for this work we must keep our
selves in readiness. Dear friend, I always think of
you with the deepest apprehension. May the genius
of the future guide and guard you in the way we de
sire.

Your devoted friend,

FR. NIETZSCHE.

To His MOTHER AND SISTER.

Bale, December 12, 1870.
DEAR MAMMA AND LIZZIE :

. . . I am gradually losing all sympathy for
Germany s present war of conquest. The future of
German culture seems to me now more in danger than
it ever was. . . .

With heartiest greetings,
YOUR FRITZ.



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 73

TO ROHDE.

Bale, December 15, 1870.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

I have not allowed a minute to elapse since reading
your letter but am replying at once. I simply wanted
to tell you that I felt just as you do and would regard
it as a disgrace if we could not get out of this state
of longing thirst by means of some energetic deed.
Now listen to what I have been turning over in my
soul ! Let us drag on for another year or two in this
University life! Let us accept it as an instructive
burden of sorrow which we are obliged to bear earn
estly and with surprise. Among other things it will
be a period of probation for the art of teaching, by
means of which I regard it as my mission to perfect
myself. The only thing is I have set my goal a little
higher.

In the long run I have become aware of the impor
tance of Schopenhauer s teaching about the wisdom
of the Universities. A thoroughly radically truthful
existence is impossible here. But what is specially
important is that nothing truly subversive can ever
emerge from this quarter.

And then we can only become genuine teachers by
straining every nerve to raise ourselves out of the
atmosphere of these times and by being not only wiser
but above all better men. Here also I feel that the
very first prerequisite is to be true. And that is why,
I repeat, I cannot endure this academic atmosphere
too long.

So it comes to this, we shall sooner or later cast
off this yoke upon this I am firmly resolved. And



74 SELECTED LETTERS OF

then we shall form a new Greek Academy Eomundt
will certainly join us in that. Thanks to your visits
to Triebschen you must also know Wagner s Bay-
reuth plan. I have been considering quite privately
whether we on our part should not simultaneously
effect a breach with philology as it has been practised
hitherto and its aspect of culture. I am preparing
an important adhortatio 1 to all those natures that
have not been completely stifled and entangled in the
present age. What a deplorable thing it is that I
should have to write to you about these matters and
that each individual thought should not have been
discussed with you long ago ! For, since you do not
know the whole apparatus as it already exists, my
plan will seem to you like an eccentric whim. But
this it is not it is a need.

A book of Wagner s about Beethoven that has just
been published you will find full of suggestions about
what I desire for the future. Read it ; it is a revela
tion of the spirit in which ice ice! shall live in the
future.

Even supposing we get but few adherents, I believe,
nevertheless, that we shall be able to extricate our
selves pretty well not without some injuries, it is
true from this current, and that we shall reach some
islet upon which we shall no longer require to stop
up our ears with wax. We shall then be our own mu
tual teachers and our books will only be so much bait
wherewith to lure others to our monastic and artistic
association. Our lives, our work, and our enjoyment

Admonition. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 75

will then be for one another; possibly this is the only
way in which we can work for the world as a whole.

In order to prove to you how deeply in earnest I am
in this matter, I have already begun to limit my re
quirements in order to be able to preserve a small
vestige of private means. We shall also try our luck
in lotteries; and, if we write books, I shall for the
immediate future demand the highest possible fees.
In short, we shall make use of every legitimate means
in order to establish our monastery upon a secure
material basis thus, even for the next few years, we
have our appointed tasks.

If only this plan would strike you as being at least
worthy of consideration! That it was high time to
lay it before you is proved by the really stirring letter
I have just received from you.

Ought we not to be able to introduce a new form
of the Academy life into the world

"And would my powerful longings, all in vain
Charm into life that deathless form again " l

as Faust says of Helen?

Nobody knows anything about this project, and
whether we shall now send a preliminary communica
tion about it to Romundt will depend upon you.

Our school of philosophy is surely not an historical
reminiscence or a deliberate whim does not dire
necessity impel us in this direction?

Apparently the plan we made as students to travel
together has returned in a new and symbolically



Goethe s Faust, Part II, Act III. Dr. John Anster s trans
lation. (1864). Translator.



TG SELECTED LETTERS OF

grander form. I will not again be the culprit who,
as on that occasion, left you in the lurch. I have not
yet ceased to be vexed about that.
With the best of hopes,

Your devoted
FRATER FRIDERICUS.



To ROHDE.

Bale, January 28, 1872.
MY VERY DEAR FRIEND :

The other day I was approached, through Susemihl,
and asked whether I would accept a professorship at
Greifswald. But I refused it immediately in your
favour and recommended you for the post. Has the
matter developed any further? I referred it to Rib-
beck. Of course, the thing got to be known here and
was the means of my earning much sympathy from
the good folk of Bale. Although I protested that it
was not actually the offer of an appointment, but
only a provisional inquiry, all the students decided
to have a torchlight procession in my honour, declar
ing that they wished to express how much they valued
and esteemed my past work in Bale. But I declined
to accept this demonstration. I am now holding a
course of lectures here on "The Future of our Edu
cational Institutions," 1 and am making quite a sensa
tion and even at times provoking genuine enthusiasm.
Why do we not live together, for all that now surges



Translated and published in Vol. Ill of Dr. Oscar Levy s
Complete and Authorized English Translation of Nietzsche s
Works (T. N. Foulis.) Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 77

in my breast and that I am preparing for the future
cannot even be touched upon in letters? I have con
cluded an alliance with Wagner. You cannot think
how near we stand to each other now and how closely
related our schemes are. What I have had to hear
about my book is incredible, but that is the reason
why I do not write anything about it. What is your
opinion on the subject? Everything I hear about it
makes me uncommonly serious, for it is out of voices
such as these that I divine the future of my schemes.
This life is going to be very hard still.

In Leipzig irritation seems to prevail again. Nobody
there writes me a line about it, not even Ritschl.

My dear friend, some time or other we absolutely
must live together ; it is a sacred necessity. For some
while I have been living in a tremendous current;
nearly every day something astounding happens,
while my aspirations and intentions continue to rise.
Let me tell you as a great secret, and begging you to
keep it to yourself, that among other things- I am
preparing a Promemoria about the University of
Strasburg in the form of an interpellation for the
Reichstag, to be delivered to. Bismarck. In it I wish
to show how. shamefully a great opportunity was lost
of making a truly German Educational Institute for
the regeneration of the German spirit and for the
total extermination of what has hitherto been called
"culture." War to the knife ! or, rather, to the cannon !

Your friend,

THE MOUNTED ARTILLERYMAN WITH
THE HEAVIEST GUNS.



78 SELECTED LETTERS OF

TO ROHDB.

Bale, June 18, 1872.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

As the result of stomach and intestinal trouble I
have been in bed for a few days and am still feeling
rather seedy to-day. So do not expect anything ex
ceptionally rational if I now answer your letter after
having all sorts of conflicting thoughts and ideas
about it. Ah, my dear friend, in such cases the
wisest course cannot be discovered by cunning; it is
only afterward that one realizes whether one has
seized upon the right thing or not. For the case is
exceptional, and I do not know by what analogy to
decide it. For my part I lay very great stress upon
the fact that the philologists will receive a wholesome
surprise when you suddenly stand up for me as a
philologist. What Wagner in his love for me ha?
written I do not know. In view of the coarse rude
ness of our fellow philologist, it will in any case have
a different effect from what he expects. It is on occa
sions like these that the invisible conspiracy against
the spirit becomes visible. But what they will least
expect, the most terrible feature of it all, will be that
a qualified philologist should come to my support.
The confidence that this could never happen explains
the superlatively impudent tone of this Berlin youth. 1
I am moreover perfectly satisfied in my own mind
that, to do him justice, he is only the echo of the
"superiors" who inspire him. As a wholesome warn
ing and to avoid having to deal with these disgusting

l Willamowitz.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 79

Berlin Gesundbrunn people, 1 every time we produce
something new you would, according to Wagner s
letter, do something eminently salutary if you de
scribed to philologists what in all its earnestness and
rigour our position toward antiquity actually is, and
above all if you could lay stress upon the fact that
it is not open to every potty little philologist who
ever he may be to have his say in these matters, much
less, therefore, to criticise them. Dear friend, I
imagine your essay starting off with general observa
tions about our philological work; the more general
and more earnest these observations are, the easier
will it be to address the whole to Wagner. In your
opening you might perhaps explain why you turn pre
cisely to Wagner and why you do not address yourself
to some philological body, for instance. You might
point out that at present we entirely lack any supreme
forum for the most ideal results of our studies of
antiquity. Then you might make some mention of
our experiences and hopes in Bayreuth and thus jus
tify us in connecting our aspirations in regard to
antiquity with this cry of "Awake ! for the day is at
hand!" 2 And then you might proceed to deal with
my book, etc. Ah, my dear friend, it is ridiculous for
me, in this seedy mood, to go and write all this to
you. But the principal thing seems to be that we
should not forego our intention of addressing Wag
ner, because it is precisely this direct relationship to
Wagner that most terrifies the philologists and com-



Gesundbrunnen, a suburb of Berlin. Translator.
Hans Sachs words in Wagner s "Meistersinger."



80 SELECTED LETTERS OF

pels them most forcibly to reflect. At the same time
the slaughter of Willamowitz must be done on purely
philological lines. Perhaps after a somewhat lengthy
introduction dealing with generalities and addressed
to Wagner, you might draw a line, and then with
some apologies turn to the execution. In any case,
toward the end of the essay your tone must once more
become so general and earnest that the reader will
forget Willamowitz and remember only that we are
not to be trifled with which will mean a good deal
where philologists are concerned. For up to the
present day they have always regarded me as a sort
of philological joker, or, as I heard a little while ago,
a writer on music.

As the essay will in any case be read by many who
are not philologists, remember, dear friend, not to be
too "noble" in the matter of your quotations, so that
the non-philological friends of antiquity may find out
where they have something to learn. Unfortunately
the tone of my own essay did not allow of any in
struction of this sort. If possible, try to wipe out
the impression that it deals with creatures in the
moon and not with the Greeks. Will your pamphlet
cover as many as thirty or forty pages? And are you
agreeable to its being published by Fritzsch, or should
Triibner have it? Ritschl would be sure to manage
that for me. (Ritschl is extraordinarily kind and
well disposed to me. ) Forgive this foolish letter, dear
friend, and do exactly as you feel inclined in the mat
ter. But rest assured that if you do it I shall thor
oughly appreciate it. In my present isolated position
I may be ignored as a visionary or an ass. But if we



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 81

stand together, both united by our love for Wagner,
we shall arouse a frantic, an egregious amount of
attention among the army of philological duffers and
rogues.

Your affectionate and devoted friend,

F. N.

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Spliigen, Hotel Bodenhaus.

Beginning of October, 1872.
MY DARLING MOTHER:

This time you are going to laugh, for this long letter
is all about a journey and lots of funny things. Half
against my will I decided to go to Italy; though it lay
heavily on my conscience that I had already written
you a letter accepting. But who can resist the capri
cious manner in which the weather has suddenly be
come the reverse of what it was! Now it is beauti
fully and purely autumnal, just the very weather for
a walking tour. Or, to be nearer the truth, I felt the
most burning desire for once to be quite alone with
my thoughts for a little while. You can guess from
the address of the hotel printed above that I have
been unexpectedly successful.

I had almost reached Zurich when I dis
covered that my companion in the compartment was
a man who was well known to me and had been even
better recommended the musician Goetz (a pupil of
Billow s) and he told me how much his musical work
had increased in Zurich since Kirclmer s departure.
But what seemed to agitate him most of all was the
prospect of seeing his opera accepted by the Hanover



82 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Theatre and produced for the first time. After leav
ing Zurich, in spite of the nice unobtrusive company,
I gradually grew so cold and ill that I had not the
courage to go as far as Chur. With great difficulty
that is to say, with a splitting headache I reached
Weesen and the Lake of Wallenstatt in the dead of
night. I found the Schwert Hotel bus and got into
it, and it set me down at a fine, comfortable, though
completely empty, hotel. On the following morning

1 rose with a headache. My window looked on to the
Lake of Wallenstatt, which you can imagine as being
like the Lake of Lucerne, but much simpler and not
so sublime. Then I went on to Chur, feeling unfor
tunately ever more and more ill at ease so much so
that I went through Ragaz, etc., almost without feel
ing the slightest interest. I was very glad to be able
to leave the train at Chur, refused the post official s
offer to drive with him which after all was the plan
and, putting up at the Hotel Lukmanier, I went
straight to bed. It was 10 a. m. I slept well until

2 p. m., felt better and ate a little. A smart and well-
informed waiter recommended me to walk as far as
Pessug, a place that was imprinted on my memory by
a picture I had seen of it in an illustrated paper.
Sabbath peace and an afternoon mood prevailed in
the town of Chur. I walked up the main road at a
leisurely pace ; as on the previous day, everything lay
before me transfigured by the glow of autumn. The
scenery behind me was magnificent, while the view
constantly changed and widened. After about half an
hour s walk I came to a little side path which was
beautifully shaded; until then the road had been



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 83

rather hot. Then I reached the gorge through which
the Rabiusa pours; its beauty defies description. I
pressed on over bridges and paths winding round the
side of the rock for about half an hour, and at last
discovered Bad Passug indicated by a flag. At first
it disappointed me, for I had expected a Pension and
saw only a second-rate inn, full of Sunday excur
sionists from Chur a crowd of comfortably feasting
and coffee-sipping families. The first thing I did was
to drink three glassfuls of the saline-soda spring;
then the improved state of my head soon allowed me
to add a bottle of white Asti Spumante you remem
ber it ! together with the softest of goat s milk cheese.
A man with Chinese eyes, who sat at my table, also
had some of the Asti to drink ; he thanked me, drank
and was much gratified. Then the proprietess handed
me a number of analyses of the water, etc. Finally,
Sprecher, the proprietor of the watering place, an
excitable sort of man, showed me all over his property,
the incredibly fantastic position of which I was
obliged to acknowledge. Again I drank copious
draughts of water from three entirely different
springs. The proprietor promised the opening of im
portant new springs, and noticing my interest in the
matter offered to make me his partner in the founding
of a hotel, etc., etc. irony ! The valley is extremely
fascinating for a geologist of unfathomable versatility
aye, and even whimsicality. There are seams of
graphite and there is also quartz with ochre. The
proprietor even hinted at gold. You can see the most
different kinds of stone strata and varieties of stone,
bending hither and thither and cracked as in the Axen-



84 SELECTED LETTERS OF

stein on the Lake of Lucerne, but here they are much
smaller and less rugged. Late in the evening, just
as it was getting dusk, I returned delighted with my
afternoon, although my mind often wandered back to
the reception I ought to have been enjoying at Naum-
burg. 1 A little child with flaxen hair was looking
about for nuts, and was very amusing. At last an
aged couple came towards me, father and daughter.
They had a few words to say, and listened in turn.
He was a very old, hoary cabinet maker, had been in
Naumburg fifty-two years ago while on his wander
ings, and remembered a very hot day there. His son
has been a missionary in India since 1858, and is ex
pected to come to Chur next year in order to see his
father once more. The daughter said she had often
been to Egypt, and spoke of Bale as an unpleasant,
hot, and stuffy town. I accompanied the good old
hobbling couple a little further. Then I returned to
dinner at my hotel, where I found one or two com
panions ready for the Splugen tour on the morrow.
On Monday I rose at 4 a. in., the diligence being timed
to leave just after 5. Before we left we had to sit
in an evil-smelling waiting room, among a number of
peasants from Graubtinden and Tessin. But at this
early hour man is in any case a disagreeable creature.
I was released by the departure of the diligence, for
I had arranged with the conductor to occupy his seat
high up on the top of the conveyance. There I was



"Note by E.F.N.: "The touching letter from our dear
mother is still extant in which she expresses her disappoint
ment over the fact that after she had made all kinds of prepa
rations, a letter came instead of her son."



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 85

alone, and it was the finest diligence drive I have ever
had. I cannot write about the tremendous grandeur
of the Via mala; it made me feel as if I did not yet
know Switzerland at all. This is my Nature, and
when we got near to Spliigen I was overcome by the
wish to stay there. I found a good hotel and a little
room that was quite touching in its simplicity. And
yet it has a balcony from which one can enjoy a most
beautiful view. This high Alpine valley (about 5,000
feet) is exactly to my taste pure and bracing air,
hills and rocks of every shape and size, and mighty
snow mountains all around. But what I like most of
all are the magnificent high roads along which I walk
for hours at a time, sometimes in the direction of
Bernaclino and sometimes along the heights of the
Pass of Spliigen, without heeding the road in the least.
But as often as I look about me I am certain to see
something gorgeous and unexpected. To-morrow it is
almost sure to snow, and I am heartily looking for
ward to it. In the afternoon, if the diligence arrives,
I take my meal with the new arrivals. There is no
need for me to speak to anyone; no one knows me;
I am absolutely alone and could stay here for weeks,
sitting and walking about. In my little room I work
with renewed vigour that is to say, I make notes and
collect ideas for the theme that is chiefly occupying
me at present : "The Future of Our Educational In
stitutions."

You do not know how pleased I am with this place.
Since I have come to know it, Switzerland has ac
quired quite a new charm for me. Now I know of a
nook where I can gain strength, work with fresh



,86 SELECTED LETTERS OF

energy, and live without any company. In this place
human beings seem to be like phantoms.

Now I have described everything to you. The days
that follow will all be like the first. Thank God, those
damnations known as "change" and "distraction" are
lacking here. Here I am together with my pen, ink,
and paper. All of us send our heartiest wishes.
Your devoted son,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To ROHDE.

Bale, November, 1872.
MY VERY DEAR FRIEND :

I think we shall be able to survive it. But some
thing has happened here that somewhat depresses me.
In our University the philologists liare kept aivay this
winter term. A perfectly unique occurrence which
you will interpret in the same way as I do. In one
particular case I know for a fact that a certain stu
dent who wished to study philology here was pre
vented from doing so in Bonn, and that he joyfully
wrote to his relations saying he thanked God he was
not going to a University where I was a teacher. In
short, the Vehmic Court 1 has done its duty, but we
must not take any notice of it. It is jolly hard though
for me to know that the little University should have
suffered on my account. We are twenty men short
of what we were last term. With the utmost pains
I was only able to muster two students to attend a
lecture on the rhetoric of the Greeks and Romans

Vehmic Court, a secret body exercising jurisdiction in the
Middle Ages.



FBIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 87

that is to say, one Germanic and one Law student
Jacob Burckhardt and Eatsherr Vischer enjoyed
your essay immensely. I informed each of them of
the fine copies you sent me, and I also told Overbeck,
Eitschl and the Florentine ladies, Olga Herzen and
Fr&ulein von Meysenbug, of them. I even have two
of them in an Edition de Luxe. I wonder whether
these copies are as you pictured them in your dream.
They bear the title E. Rohde on The Birth of Tragedy
and include your two essays. To me these essays con
stitute a veritable treasure which every author of the
past and future will have to envy me. My friend Ini-
merman, here, always says that your stuff is at least
as good as mine. In short, they have noticed our
Orestes and Pylades relationship ^atajtoldiv evt
leivoiai 1 and they rejoice over it. What I only men
tion, because neither of us doubts it, is that many
more are angry about it. ...

. Have you heard of the Zollner scandal in
Leipzig? Just have a look at his book on the nature
of comets. There is a tremendous deal on our side
in it. Since this production the honest man has been
as good as excommunicated in the most shabby man
ner from the whole of the republic of letters. His
nearest friends are renouncing him and he is pro
claimed "mad" to all the world ! He is seriously de
clared "deranged," simply because he refuses to blow
into the Tantara trumpet of the clique. Such is the
spirit of Leipzig s scholastic ochlocracy!
Are you aware, too, that a certain alienist has

Amongst the Forbidding 1 (severe) Foreigners. Trans
lator.



88 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

proved in the most "dignified language" that Wagner
is demented? And you are probably aware of the
fact that the same thing has been done for Schopen
hauer by another alienist.

You see to what measures these "healthy people"
resort. True, they do not decree the scaffold for the
discomfiting ingenia, but this sort of sneaking and
malevolent creation of suspicion answers their pur
pose much better than the sudden removal of their
enemies ; they undermine the confidence of the rising
generation. Schopenhauer forgot this dodge! It is
singularly worthy of the vulgarity of the vulgarest
age. . . .

Yours affectionately,

F.

NIETZSCHE To MALVIDA VON MEYSENBUG.

Bale, April 6, 1873.
DEAREST FRAULEIN:

. At Bayreuth I hope to find courage and
good cheer once more and to fortify myself in all that
is right. I dreamt last night that I had my Gradus
ad Parnassum rarely and beautifully bound ; the sym
bolism attached to the binding of a book is compre
hensible enough, even if deficient in taste. This is a
truth ! From time to time one ought to have oneself
newly bound, so to speak, by intercourse with good
and robust men; otherwise one loses isolated leaves
and falls ever more and more to pieces. And that our
life ought to be a Gradus ad Parnassian is also a
truth which one ought often to repeat to oneself. My
Parnassus of the future is provided I take great



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 89

pains and have decent luck as well as plenty of time
to become perhaps a tolerable writer, but above all
to become ever more moderate in the production of
literature. From time to time I feel a childish repul
sion toward printed paper, which at such times seems
to me simply soiled paper. And I can picture a time
when men will prefer reading little and writing less,
while thinking much and doing even more. For the
whole world is now waiting for the man of deeds, who
strips the habits of centuries from himself and others,
and who sets a better example for posterity to follow.
Under my own roof something very fine is in process
of completion, a description of our present day the
ology, bearing particularly upon the spirit of Chris
tianity. My friend and brother in thought, Professor
Overbeck, to my own knowledge the freest theologist
now living, and in any case one of the greatest au
thorities on Church history, is now at work on this
description, and will, if I am not mistaken and we
are quite agreed on this point make known a few
terrible truths to the world. Bale looks well on the
road to becoming the most suspected of places ! . . .
Your devoted friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER.

Bale, September 21, 1873.
MY DARLING MOTHER:

And so our dear aunt has passed away and we are
becoming more and more lonely. To grow old and
to grow solitary seem to be synonymous, and at last



90 SELECTED LETTERS OF

a man is all alone and makes others feel lonely by
his death.

It was precisely because I knew so little of my
father, and had to form a picture of him from the
materials supplied by chance conversations, that his
nearest relatives were more to me than aunts usually
are. When I think of Aunt Kickchen and the Plauen
relatives, etc., I rejoice over the fact that they all
remained true to their exceptional nature until they
attained to a great age, and were sufficiently self-
reliant to be less than usually dependent upon ex
ternal influences and upon the doubtful good will of
their fellow creatures. I rejoice over this fact be
cause in it I find the racial peculiarity of those who
call themselves Nietzsche, and I possess it myself.

And that is why our good aunt was always so kindly
disposed towards me, because she realized how akin
we were in one important particular, namely, in this
important Nietzschean trait. For this reason I honour
their memory by wishing with all my might that when
I grow old I may not desert myself that is to say,
the spirit of my forebears.

Do not expect any more from me for the moment,
dear mother you who are so very much worried be
cause you always will be so helpful and think kindly
of your son, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Bale, October 27, 1873.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

The green numbers of the Grenzboten
have just published a Non plus ultra under the title



FRIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 91

of "Herr Friedrich Nietzsche and German Culture."
All the powers are mobilized against me the police,
the authorities, and the colleagues. It is emphatically
declared that I shall be ostracized from every German
university, and that Bale will probably do likewise.
It proceeds to inform the reader that owing to a trick
of RitschFs and the stupidity of the people of Bale
I was transformed from a mere student into a Univer
sity professor. Bale then came in for some abuse as
an obscure little University. I am denounced as an
enemy of the German Empire and the ally of the In
ternationalists, etc. in short, a commendable and
cheerful Documentnm. What a pity I cannot send it
to you ! Even Fritszch gets a kick or two ; they think
it scandalous that a German publisher should ever
have accepted my work. So you see, dearest friend,
our No. 1 has as Fritzsch would say "found favour
with the public."

Nine Bale newspapers have now referred to me in
all manner of ways, but on the whole much more seri
ously than that truculent Grenzboten reviewer and
humbug.

Your ever devoted and affectionate friend,

F. N.

To KOIIDE.

Naumburg, December 31, 1873.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

What a lot of good you have done me with your
letter, particularly as I was lying in bed feeling ill
after the journey and full of resentment towards life.
Really, if I had not my friends, I wonder whether 1



92 SELECTED LETTERS OF

should not myself begin to believe that I am demented.
As it is, however, by my adherence to you I adhere to
myself, and if we stand security for each other, some
thing must ultimately result from our way of think
ing a possibility which until now the whole w r orld
has doubted.

And to this whole world belong even the Ritschls,
to whom I paid a short visit and who in half an hour
fired a rapid volley of words at me and against me,
under which I remained unscathed and, moreover,
felt it. Finally they came to the conclusion that I
was arrogant and despised them. The general im
pression was hopeless. At one moment old Ritschl
simply raved with indignation about Wagner as a
poet, and then again about the French (by-the-bye, I
am understood to be an admirer of the French) ;
finally he argued from hearsay, but in the most atro
cious manner, about Overbeck s book. I learnt that
Germany was still in its ? teens, and therefore I too
claimed the right of being something of a boy in his
teens (for they also censured my lack of moderation
and my brutality towards Strauss). On the other
hand, Strauss as a classical writer of prose is com
pletely annihilated, for old Ritschl and his wife say
so, and have long since come to the conclusion that
even "Voltaire" 1 was written in abominably bad style.

I lived at Fritzsch s and was really delighted with
that good man. Things are going well with him, his
health included. My second "Thoughts Out of Sea
son" (or over- sea soned thoughts) is now in the press.
You will receive the first proofs in a few days, for,



Another book by Strauss. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 93

my dear friend, I am going to avail myself of your
willing kindness and beg you to help me with your
advice here and there, and moral and intellectual cor
rection. After all, we must not lose much time, for
it will be printed quickly and must be quite ready at
the end of January.

Therefore, my dear good friend, send your corrected
proofs every time as soon as possible to me here in
Bale, for the long distances make things a little com
plicated and we must try to avoid any hitch in the
printing. . . .

Karl Hillebrand s anonymous book, "Twelve Let
ters By An, Aesthetic Heretic" (Berlin, Oppenheiin,
1874), has given me the most unbounded joy. How
refreshing it is! Read and wonder; he is one of us,
one of the "Company of the Hopeful."

May this company flourish in the new year and
may we remain good comrades ! Ah, my dear fellow,
we have no choice; we must either be hopeful or des
perate. Once and for all, I have resolved to hope.

I was very vexed at the horribly cautious academic
Confratres in Kiel. Fancy such fear of "Youth" ! . . .

So may we remain faithful friends in 1874 and con
tinue so until the last day.

Yours, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To ROHDE.

Bale, February 15, 1874.
DEAREST FRIEND:

First of all, my best Sunday greeting to you. Are
you living in the gray north? We are having such
fine warm days with plenty of sunshine and even deep-



94 SELECTED LETTERS OF

coloured sunsets already. We have only bad one day s
snow the whole winter. Since the new year, too, I
have been living more carefully and rationally, and
am feeling fit in consequence. My eyes are the only
trouble. I sorely need an amanuensis. I must tell
you though that for the last six months a most sym
pathetic and talented pupil has come under my notice,
one who already belongs to our party heart and soul.
His name is Bauingartner, an Alsatian, and the sou
of a manufacturer of Mulhausen. He comes to me
every Wednesday afternoon and stops the evening,
and then I dictate to him or he reads aloud to me, or
letters are written. In short, he is a godsend to me,
and, I assure you, will be for all of us one day. At
Easter I shall go back to Naumburg again in order
to try a systematic course of rest and wholesome liv
ing, and then I shall ultimately be able to bear things
a little better. I have thought out a good deal since
Christmas, and have had to roam so far afield that
often when my proofs arrive I wonder when I could
have written the stuff, and whether it can all be my
work. I am feeling very hostile just now towards all
political and smug bourgeois virtues and duties, and
occasionally I even soar far above "national" feeling.
May God mend this and me!

In addition to all your trouble, dear faithful friend,
you have also had that of proof-reading. The smallest
hint is gratefully turned to account, and many a
blemish has been removed by your hand. By-the-bye,
a whole number of strange errors had nothing to do
with me, but arose out of the copying of my illegible
MS. Unfortunately I was unable to avail myself of



PRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 95

jour help for the last sheet. For many reasons I
thought they had forgotten to send it to you and time
was pressing. Luckily I was able to remove the worst
stumbling block myself, and have made the text of the
conclusion a little lighter by cutting out about a page.
A certain generality of treatment was, however, neces
sary, as I had to take into account the elaboration of
some of the special arguments in subsequent
"Thoughts Out of Season." So let the monster go its
way. I wonder who will find any pleasure in it ! Who
will even read it? I believe people will think it a piece
of great foolishness on my part and they will be
right ! But I am really heartily tired of all this clev
erness and must become absorbed in myself. On my
honour, I cannot help it. But promise me you will not
immediately despise me on that account. For I really
believe that you understand me in these things and
have a right to it, dear friend. When I think of my
fellow philologists I sometimes feel something like
shame. Still, I do not believe I can be so easily driven
off my appointed path and before that I mean to say
for once all I have to say; one cannot do oneself a
greater kindness than that. When you get your copy
(which I hope will be within a fortnight), I beg you
to do me just this one favour : tell me as severely and
briefly as you like all about my faults, my mannerisms,
and the dangers of my method of exposition, for I am
not satisfied with it and aspire to something quite
different. Help me, therefore, with a few little hints,
I shall be most grateful.
Good-bye, dear friend.

Yours, FRIEDRICH N.



96 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFP.

Bale, April 1, 1874.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

If only you had not such an exaggeratedly high
opinion of me! I am afraid that one day you will
be somewhat disappointed in me, and I will inaugu
rate this change in you at once by declaring from the
bottom of my heart that I deserve not one word of
the praise you have lavished upon me. If only you
knew how disheartened and melancholy I really feel
about myself as a productive being! All I long for
is a little freedom, a taste of the real breath of life;
and I kick, I revolt against the many, the unutterably
many constraints to which my mind is still subject.
And of real productive work there can be no thought
so long as one is not freed, however slightly, from
one s trammels and the pain or oppression arising
from one s limited outlook. Shall I ever attain to
inner freedom? It is very doubtful. The goal is too
remote, and even if one gets within measurable dis
tance of it, one has by that time consumed all one s
strength in a long search and struggle. When free
dom is at last attained, one is as lifeless and feeble
as a day-fly by night. That is what I dread so much.
It is a misfortune to be so conscious of one s struggle
and so early in life! And unlike the artist or the
ascetic, I cannot balance my doubts by means of great
deeds. How wretched and loathsome it is to me to
be continually wailing like a mire-drum. For the
moment I am really very, very tired of everything
more than tired.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 97

My health, by-the-bye, is excellent; you need have
no fears about that. But I am not quite satisfied
with Nature, who ought to have given me a little more
intellect as well as a warmer heart. I always fall
short of the best. To know this, is the greatest tor
ture a man can have. Regular work in an official post
is so good because it leads to a certain obtuseness and
then one suffers less.

. Accept my best wishes for yourself and
your dear parents. Think what life would be like
without a friend! Could one bear it? Would one
have borne it? Dubito.

FRIDERICUS.

To ROHDE.

Bale, October 7, 1874.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

Last night I returned from the mountains, and this
morning I mean to set to and consecrate the work of
the winter term by means of a birthday letter to you.
I do not lack either courage or confidence; I have
brought back both of these with me from the moun
tains and the lakes, where I discovered what it was
that one lacked most, or rather what it was that one
has too much of. That is to say, egoism ; and this is
the result of one s eternal lonely brooding and lonely
suffering. In the end, one begins to feel constantly
as if one were covered with a hundred scars and every
movement were painful. But, joking apart, I shall
very soon be thirty and things must change somewhat ;
they must become more virile, more even in tenour,
and no longer so damned unstable. To continue one s



98 SELECTED LETTERS OF

work and to think of oneself as little as possible
that must be the first necessity. After some reflection
it has struck me that I am very ungrateful and
childish with my irritating despair, for I have been
thinking how incomparably lucky I have been during
the last seven years and how little I can gauge how
rich I am in my friends. Truth to tell, I live through
you; I advance by leaning upon your shoulders, for
my self-esteem is wretchedly weak and you have to
assure me of my own value again and again. In
addition to that, you are my best examples, for both
you and Overbeck bear life s lot with more dignity
and less wailing, although in many respects things
are more and more difficult for you than for me. But
what I feel most is the way you outstrip me in loving
solicitude and unselfishness. I have thought much
about these facts of late, and I may surely be allowed
to mention them to you in a birthday letter.

Farewell, my dear friend, and remain as affec
tionate to me as you have been hitherto then we
shall easily be able to endure life yet a while longer.
Your devoted friend,


Bale, October 25, 1874.
DEAREST FRAULEIN :

At last I am able once again to let you have some
news of me by sending you another work of mine. 1



J The third of the "Thoughts Out of Season" Schopenhauer
as an Educator. Translator.



FBIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 99

From the contents of this last essay you will be able
to form some idea of all that I have experienced in
the interval. Also, that with the lapse of years I am,
among other things, in a much more serious and pre
carious position than you might gather from the mere
reading of the book itself. In summa, however, you
will surmise that things are going well with me, and
going onwards, too, and that all I lack, alas! is just
a little of the sunshine of life. Otherwise I should
be compelled to acknowledge that things could not
be going better with me than they are. For it is in
deed a piece of great good fortune for me to progress
step by step towards the accomplishment of my mis
sion. And now I have written three of the thirteen
"Thoughts Out of Season," and the fourth is already
taking shape in my mind. How happy I shall feel
when I have at last unburdened my heart of all its
negative hates and all its indignation, and yet I dare
hope that in five years I shall be within sight of this
glorious goal ! Already at the present moment I am
thankful to feel how very much more clearly and
sharply I am learning to see things spiritually (not
bodily, alas!) and how very much more definitely
and intelligibly I can express myself. Provided that
I am not led entirely astray in my course, or that my
health does not break down, something must certainly
come of all this. Just imagine a series of fifty such
essays as the four I have already written all the
product of a souPs experience forced into the light
of day! With such matter one could not help but
produce some effect; for the tongues of many would
have been unloosed and enough would have been put



100 SELECTED LETTERS OF

into words that could not be so quickly forgotten,
much that to-day is almost as good as forgotten yea,
that is scarcely to hand. And what should divert me
in my course? Even hostile attacks I can now turn
to account and to pleasure, for they often enlighten
me more quickly than friendly sympathy, and I desire
nothing more than to be enlightened about the highly
complex system of conflicting elements that consti
tutes the "modern world." Fortunately, I am quite
devoid of all political and social ambition, so that I
need fear no dangers in that direction no loadstones
to draw me aside, no compulsion to compromise or
to consider consequences; in short, I can say all I
think, and what I want to do is to test once and for
all to what extent modern mankind so proud of its
freedom of thought can endure free thought. I do not
ask anything either excessive or fantastic from life;
besides, in the course of the next few years we shall
experience something for which all the world of the
past and the future may envy us. Moreover, I am
blessed beyond all deserts with the most excellent of
friends; and now, quite between ourselves, the only
thing I want, and that quite soon, is a good wife, and
then I shall regard all my worldly wishes as fulfilled.
All the rest depends upon myself.

Meanwhile, my heartiest wishes for your health,
and may you continue to think kindly of

Your most devoted servant,

FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



It was a good thing that you wrote me a letter close
on the heels of the one mother wrote, for I was beside
myself and had already written down some bitter
words. I now see that I misunderstood her.

But how is it that she was able to misunderstand
me so, and all this time to conceal from me this in
comprehensible hostility to the two Wagners? Am I
so difficult to understand and so easy to misunder
stand in all my intentions, plans, and friendships?
Ah, we lonely ones and free spirits it is borne home
to us that in some way or other we constantly appear
different from what we think. Whereas we wish for
nothing more than truth and straightforwardness, we
are surrounded by a net of misunderstanding, and
despite our most ardent wishes we cannot help our
actions being smothered in a cloud of false opinion,
attempted compromises, semi-concessions, charitable
silence, and erroneous interpretations. Such things
gather a weight of melancholy on our brow; for we
hate more than death the thought that pretence should
be necessary, and such incessant chafing against these
things makes us volcanic and menacing. From time
to time we avenge ourselves for all our enforced con
cealment and compulsory self-restraint. We emerge
from our cells with terrible faces, our words and
deeds are then explosions, and it is not beyond the
verge of possibility that we perish through ourselves.
Thus dangerously do I live! It is precisely we soli
tary ones that require love and companions in whose



102 SELECTED LETTERS OF

presence we may be open and simple, and the eternal
struggle of silence and dissimulation can cease.

Yes, I am glad that I can be myself, openly and
honestly with you, for you are such a good friend
and companion, and the older you grow and the more
you free yourself from the Naumburg atmosphere, the
more will you certainly adapt yourself to all my views
and aspirations.

With love and devotion,

YOUR BROTHER.

(Marginal note by Nietzsche in the foregoing let
ter) : You can read all this in print in my Schopen
hauer; but they are at the same time my own ex
periences and feelings that always visit me as at the
present moment, for instance.



To ROHDE.

Bale, February 28, 1875.
DEAREST FRIEND:

. Now, let me tell you something you do
not yet know something which you, as my most inti
mate and most sympathetic friend, have a right to
know. We two, Overbeck and I, have a domestic
trouble, a domestic ghost. Please don t have a fit
when you hear that X is contemplating going over
to the Holy Catholic Church and wants to become a
Catholic priest in Germany. This has only just come
to light, but as we afterwards heard, to our dismay,
he has been thinking over it for years, though his
resolution has never been so mature as it is now. I
cannot help feeling hurt over it, and at times it seems



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 103

to me the worst possible slight that could be given
me. Of course, he does not mean it in that way, for
up to the present he has not for one moment thought
of anyone but himself, and the confounded stress our
religion lays on the "salvation of one s own soul"
leaves him utterly indifferent to anything else, friend
ship included. ... At last, he confessed what his at
titude was, and now every three days, almost, there is
an explosion. The poor man is in a desperate condi
tion and no longer accessible to words of counsel;
that is to say, he is so entirely led by vague aspira
tions that he seems to us like a wandering valleity.
Oh, our excellent, pure Protestant air ! I have never
in my life before felt my dependence upon the spirit
of Luther so strongly as I do now, and this wretched
man wants to turn his back on all these liberating
geniuses ! It is so very hard for me to understand how,
after eight years of intimate association with me, this
spectre should arise at my elbow, that I often wonder
whether he can be in his right senses, and whether he
ought not to undergo a cold- water cure. And, after
all, I am the man on whom the blame of this con
version will rest. God knows I do not say that out
of egoistic solicitude. But I, too, believe that I stand
for something holy, and I should blush for shame if
I were suspected of having had anything to do with
Catholicism, for there is nothing I hate with a more
deadly hatred.

Interpret this ghastly story in as friendly a manner
as possible and send me a few words of comfort. I
have been wounded precisely in my friendship, and
hate the dishonest, sneaking nature of many friend-



104 SELECTED LETTERS OF

ships more than ever, and shall have to be more cau
tious in future. X himself will doubtless be quite

at home in some sort of conventicle, but in our com
pany he seems to me now to be suffering incessantly.
Your disconsolate friend,



Bale, December 8, 1875.

Ah, dear friend, I did not know what to say to you,
so I held my peace and was full of fear and anxiety
on your account. I did not even like to ask how
things were going, but how often, how very often my
heartfelt sympathy sped your way! Everything has
turned out as badly as possible, and I can think of
only one way in which it could have been worse to
wit, if the matter were less appallingly plain than it
actually is. The most intolerable thing of all is surely
doubt, ghostlike semi-certainty and you have at least
been relieved of this, which was such a torment to
you here. I am now racking my brain in trying to
discover how you can possibly be helped. For a long
while I thought that they were going to transfer you
and that they would give you an appointment at Frei
burg in Breisgau. But afterwards it struck me that
such an idea had never even entered their minds.
Certainly the publication of your work will prove the
best remedy in your case. One cannot help deriving
some pleasure from that, and at all events it will force
you to think of other matters. This promises to be a



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 105

steady pursuit and will perhaps help you over this
terrible winter.

Let me tell you how I am faring. As far as my
health is concerned, things are not so good as I really
supposed they would be when I effected the complete
change in my mode of life here. Every two or three
weeks I have to lie in bed for about thirty-six hours
in great pain with the usual trouble you know so well.
Perhaps it will gradually get better, but I feel as if
I had never had such a hard winter. What with new
lectures, etc., the day drags so wearily that in the
evening I am always more and more glad to have
finished, and actually marvel at the hardness of exist
ence. The whole exasperating business does not seem
worth while; the pain you inflict on yourself and
others is out of all proportion to the benefit either
they or you yourself derive from your efforts. This
is the opinion of a man who does not happen to be
troubled by his passions, though he is certainly not
made happy by them either. During the hours that
I rest my eyes, my sister reads aloud to me, almost
always Walter Scott, whom I would readily agree
with Schopenhauer in calling "immortal." What
pleases me so much in him is his artistic calm, his
Andante. I should like to recommend him to you,
but there are some things which, though they benefit
me, can get no hold of your spirit, because you think
more quickly and more sharply than I do. As to the
use of novels for the treatment of one s soul, I will
say nothing more particularly as you are already
forced to help yourself with your own "novel." Nay,
I advise you to read "Don Quixote" again not be-



106 SELECTED LETTERS OF

cause it is the most cheerful but because it is the most
austere reading I know. I took it up during the sum
mer holidays, and all personal troubles seemed to
shrink to nothing and appear simply laughable, not
even worthy of a wry face. All earnestness, all pas
sion, and everything men take to heart is Quixotism
for some things it is good to know this; otherwise it
is better not to know it. ...
Your friend,

F. N.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Bale, December 13, 1875.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

I received your letter yesterday, and this morning,
just at the beginning of a week of hard work, your
books arrived. A man certainly ought to feel cheerful
when he has such sympathetic and affectionate
friends! Believe me, I admire the fine instinct of
your friendship I trust the expression does not
sound too biological which made you light upon
these Indian maxims, just as I, with a sort of waxing
thirst, have been turning longing eyes to India for the
last two months. From Schmeitzner s friend, Herr
Widemann, I borrowed the English translation of the
Sutra Nipata, a portion of the sacred books of the
Buddhists, and I have already made a household word
of a strong closing sentence from one of the Sutras
"and thus I wander alone like a rhinoceros." My con
viction about the worthlessness of life and the delu
siveness of all aims frequently oppresses me so keen
ly, particularly when I lie in bed feeling ill, that I



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 107

long to hear more of this Indian wisdom, provided it
is not permeated with Judaeo-Christian phraseology.
For, some time or other, I learnt to feel such a loath
ing for this phraseology that I literally have to be on
my guard against dealing unjustly with it.

As to how the world wags this you can tell from
the enclosed letter from that terrible sufferer Z . Of
course one ought not to cling to it, and yet what can
help one to endure life, when one no longer really
wills anything! I am of opinion that the will to
knowledge is the last remaining vestige of the will to
life ; it is an intermediary region between willing and
no longer willing, a piece of purgatory, in so far as
we look discontentedly and contemptuously on life,
and a piece of Nirvana, in so far as, through it, the
soul approaches the state of pure disinterested con
templation. I am training myself to unlearn the eager
hurry of the will to knowledge. This is what all
scholars suffer from, and that is why they all lack
the glorious serenity derived from acquired enlight
enment, insight. For the present I am too heavily
burdened by the various claims of my official post
to help falling all too frequently though reluctantly
into that eager hurry, but by degrees I shall put all
this right. And then my health will be more settled
a condition I shall not attain before I thoroughly
deserve it, before, that is to say, I have discovered
that state of my soul which is, as it were, my destiny,
that healthy state in which it has retained but one of
all its instincts the will to know. A simple home,
a perfectly regular daily routine, no enervating han
kering after honours or society, my sister s company



108 SELECTED LETTERS OF

(which makes everything about me Nietzschean and
strangeful restful), the consciousness of having 40
excellent books of all times and climes (and many
more which are not altogether bad), the constant joy
of having found educators in Schopenhauer and Wag
ner, and the Greeks as the object of my daily work,
the belief that henceforward I shall no longer lack
pupils 1 all these things now for the time being make
up my life. Unfortunately my chronic physical trou
bles, which at fortnightly intervals seize me for about
two days at a time and sometimes longer, must be
added to the reckoning. But they must end some
day.

Later on, when you are securely settled down in
your own home, you will be able to reckon upon me
as a holiday guest who will be likely to spend some
considerable time with you. It is often a solace to me
to exercise my imagination anticipating these later
years of your life, and I often think I may one day
be of service to you in your sons. Yes, dear old de
voted Gersdorff, we have now shared a goodly portion
of youth, experience, education, inclination, hatred,
striving, and hope in common ; we know that we can
thoroughly enjoy even sitting beside each other in
silence. I don t think we need to give each other
any pledges or promises, because we thoroughly be
lieve in each other. I know from experience that you
help me where you can, and whenever I have reason
to rejoice I always think, "How pleased Gersdorff
will be !" For, I must tell you, you have the magnifi-



1( The attacks of his German colleagues had emptied his
auditorium. Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 109

cent gift of sympathizing with another s joy and
this is a rarer and nobler capacity than pity.

And now farewell, and may you cross the threshold
of your new year of life the same man as you have
always been. I cannot wish you more. It was as
this man that you won your friends, and if there are
still a few sensible women knocking around you will
not have much longer

"To wander alone like a rhinoceros."
Your devoted friend,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



To FREIHERR R. v. SEYDLITZ.

Bale, September 24, 1876.
DEAR SIR:

After a letter such as yours, containing so stirring
a testimony of the depth of your soul and intellect, I
can say nothing but this: let us keep in close touch
with each other, let us see to it that we do not lose
each other again now we have found each other!
I rejoice in the certainty of having won another genu
ine friend. And if you only knew what this means
to me! For am I not as constantly engaged in the
kidnapping of men as any pirate not, however, with
the object of selling them into bondage, but rather in
order to sell them, with myself, into freedom.
Your sincere and devoted friend,

FRIEDR. NIETZSCHE.



110 SELECTED LETTEItS OF

To FREIHERB KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Bale, May 26, 1876.
DEAR FRIEND :

. . . I must tell you something, which, so far as
other people are concerned, is still a secret, and must
remain so for the present : following upon an invita
tion of the best friend in the world, Fraulein von
Meysenbug, I intend in October to spend a whole year
in Italy. I have not yet been granted leave by the
authorities, but I think it will come, more particu
larly as, with the view of sparing so small a corpora
tion the burden of my pay, I have volunteered to for
feit my salary for the whole period. Freedom! You
cannot imagine how deeply I breathe when I think of
it ! We shall live in the simplest manner possible at
Fano (on the Adriatic). This is my news. All my
hopes and plans regarding my ultimate spiritual
emancipation and untiring advancement are once
more in full bloom. My confidence in myself, I mean
in my better self, fills me with courage. Even the
state of my eyes does not affect this. ( Schiess thinks
they are worse than they were some time ago. The
long and short of it is I want a secretary) . My lectures
are very w T ell attended. In one of them I have about 20
scholars, in the other about 10, and the same numbers
at the school. I shall certainly not marry; on the
whole, I hate the limitations and obligations of the
whole civilized order of things so very much that it
would be difficult to find a woman free-spirited enough
to follow my lead. The Greek philosophers seem to
me ever more and more to represent the paragon of
what one should aim at in our mode of life. I read



FKIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 111

Xenophon s Memorabilia with the deepest personal in
terest. Philologists regard them as hopelessly tedi
ous. You see how little of a philologist I am.

F. N.

To MADAME LOUISE O.

Bale, September, 1876.
DEAR, KIND FRIEND :

In the first place I was unable to write, for I under
went an eye-cure, and now I ought not to write for a
long long time to come ! Nevertheless I read your two
letters again and again ; I almost believe I read them
too often. But this new friendship is like new wine
very agreeable though perhaps a trifle dangerous.

At least for me.

But for you also, especially when I think of the
sort of free spirit you have lighted upon ! a man who
longs for nothing more than daily to be rid of some
comforting belief, and who seeks and finds his happi
ness in this daily increase in the emancipation of his
spirit. It is possible I ictih to become more of a free
spirit than I am capable of becoming.

So what is to be done? An "Abduction from the
Harem" 1 of Faith, without Mozart s music?

Do you know Fraulein von Meysenbug s autobiog
raphy published under the title of "Memoirs of an
Idealist ?

What is poor little Marcel doing with his little
teeth? We all have to suffer before we really learn
to bite, physically and morally biting in order to

" Die Entfiihrung aus dem Serail," first performed in
Vienna July 10th, 1752. Translator.



1112 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

nourish ourselves, of course, not simply for the sake
of biting!

Is there no good portrait in existence of a certain
blond and beautiful woman?

Sunday week I shall go to Italy for a long stay.
You will hear from me when I get there. In any case
a letter sent to my address in Bale (45 Schiitzengra-
ben) will reach me.

In brotherly affection,
Yours
DR. FRIEDR. NIETZSCHE.

To ROHDE.

Rosenlauibad, August 28, 1877.
DEAR OLD FRIEND :

How can I express it? But every time I think of
you I am overcome by a sort of deep emotion; and
when, a day or two ago, someone wrote to me "Rohde s
young wife is an exceedingly sweet woman whose
every feature is illumined by her noble soul," I actu
ally wept. And I can give you absolutely no plausible
reason for having done so. We might ask the psychol
ogists for an explanation. Ultimately they would de
clare it was envy and that I grudged you your happi
ness, or that it was my vexation at someone having
run away with my friend and having concealed him
Heaven alone knows where, on the Rhine or in Paris,
and refused to give him up again. When I was hum
ming my "Hymn to Solitude" to myself a few days
ago, I suddenly had the feeling that you could not
abide my music at all and that you would much have-
preferred a song on Dual Bliss. The same evening I



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 113

played a song of this sort, as well as I was able, and it
was so successful that all the angels might have lis
tened to it with joy, particularly the human ones. But
it was in a dark room and no one heard it. Thus I am
forced to consume my own happiness, tears, and every
thing in private.

Shall I tell you all about myself how every day I
set out two hours before the sun rises on the hills and
after that take my walks only among the lengthening
shadows of the afternoon and evening? How many
things I have thought out, and how rich I feel now
that this year I have at last been allowed to strip off
the old moss growth of the daily routine of teaching
and thinking! As to my life here, I can only say that
it is tolerable, in spite of all my ailments which have
certainly followed me even up to the heights but I
have so many intervals of happy exultation both of
thought and feeling.

A little while ago I had a genuinely sacred day,
thanks to "Prometheus Unbound." If the poet 1 be
not a true genius then I do not know what genius
means. The whole thing is wonderful, and I felt as
if I had met my own transfigured and exalted self in
the work. I bow low before a man who is capable
of having and expressing such thoughts.

In three days I shall return to Bale. My sister is
already there and busy preparing the place for my ar
rival.

The faithful musician P. Gast is going to join our



Siegfried Lipiner, one of Nietzsche s admirers, had sent
Nietzsche his own poem. Translator.



114 SELECTED LETTERS OF

household, and is going to undertake the duties of a
friendly amanuensis.

I am rather dreading the coming winter. Things
must change. The man who only has a few moments
a day for what he regards as most important, and who
has to spend the rest of his time and energy perform
ing duties which others could carry out equally well
such a man is not a harmonious whole ; he must be
in conflict with himself and must ultimately fall ill.
If I exercise any influence over youth at all, I owe
it to my writings, and for these I have to thank my
leisure moments yes, the intervals I have won for
myself, in the midst of professional duties by means
of illness. Well, things must change : si male nunc non
olim sic erit. 1 Meanwhile may the happiness of my
friends increase and flourish. It is always a great
solace to me to think of you, my dear friend (just now
I have a vision of you on the bank of a lake sur
rounded by roses and with a beautiful white swan
swimming towards you) .

With brotherly affection,

Yours
F.

To MADAME LOUISE O.

Eosenlauibad, August 29, 1877.
DEAR FRIEND :

I shall not forsake my mountain loneliness without
once more writing to tell you how fond I am of you.
How superfluous it is to say this, or to write it, isn t



" If things are bad today, at some future time they will be
better." Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 115

it? But my affection for anyone sticks to them like
a thorn, and at times is as troublesome as a thorn ; it
is not so easy to get rid of it. So be good enough to
receive this small, superfluous, and troublesome let
ter.

I have been told that well, that you are expecting,
hoping, wishing. I deeply sympathized with you when
I heard the news, and, believe me, your wishes are
mine. A fresh, good, and beautiful human being on
earth ! that is something, it is a great deal ! As you
absolutely refuse to immortalize yourself in novels,
you do so in this way. And we must all feel most
grateful to you (more particularly as I hear it is a
much more trying affair even than the writing of
novels).

A day or two ago, quite suddenly, I saw your eyes
in the dark. Why does no one ever look at me with
such eyes? I exclaimed irritably. Oh, it is ghastly!

Do you know that no woman s voice has ever made
a deep impression on me, although I have met all
kinds of famous women? But I firmly believe there
is a voice for me somewhere on earth, and I am seek
ing it. Where on earth is it?

Fare you well. May all the good fairies be con
stantly about you.

Your devoted friend,

FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To SEYDLITZ.
MY DEAR FRIEND : Bale, January 4, 1878.

. . . Yesterday Wagner sent me his Parsifal.
My impression after the first perusal was that it is



116 SELECTED LETTERS OF

more Liszt than Wagner; it is in the spirit of the
Counter-Reformation. To me, accustomed as I am to
the Greek and generally human concept of things, it
is all too Christian, too limited in its duration. It is
one mass of fantastic psychology, has no flesh and too
much blood (especially at the Last Supper, which was
far too full-blooded for my taste.) And then I can
not abide hysterical females. Much that can be tol
erated by the inner eye will scarcely be endured when
it is produced on the stage. Imagine our actors pray
ing and quivering with distorted necks! Even the
inside of the Gralsberg cannot be effective on the
stage, and the same applies to the wounded swan.
All these beautiful devices belong to the epic and are,
as I have said, for the inner eye of the imagination.
The German sounds as if it were a translation from
a foreign tongue. But as for the situations and their
succession are they not in the highest sense poetical?
Do they not constitute a last challenge to music?

Please be content with this for to-day, and with
kindest regards to your dear wife and yourself,
I am, yours affectionately, NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO MALVIDA VON MEYSENBUG.

Bale, June 11, 1878.

Who was it who thought of me on May 30 ?* I re
ceived two very fine letters (from Gast and Ree) and



a Note by Frau F. Nietzsche: "Strange to say, a bust of
Voltaire reached my brother on May 30, accompanied by this
anonymous note: U&me de Voltaire fait ses compliments a
Frederic Nietzsche. At that time the identity of the sender
was an insoluble mystery; but in later years it struck me that
it might have been that excellent young man Gersdorff."



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 117

then something still finer: I was quite moved the
fate of the man about whom for the last hundred
years there have existed only party prejudices loomed
as a terrible symbol before my eyes. Towards the
emancipators of the spirit mankind is most irrecon
cilable in its hate, and most unjust in its love. Al
beit I shall go on my way in peace, and renounce
everything that might stand in my way. This is the
decisive element in life: were I not conscious of the
superlative fruitfulness of my new philosophy, I
should certainly feel frightfully isolated and alone.
But I am Sit one with myself.

Your heartily devoted friend,

F. N.



NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Bale, March 1, 1879.
DEAR, KIND, HELPFUL FRIEND :

There is now only one thing left to be done, and
that is to try to get well in Venice I 1 My condition
has again been simply appalling, next door to intol
erable. "Am I fit to travel?" The question I kept
asking myself was whether I should be alive by then.

Provisional programme :

On Tuesday evening, March 25, at about 7.45 I
shall reach Venice, and there you will take me on
board. Is that right? You will hire a private apart-

This is a reference to Peter Cast s constant assurance that
Venice would prove beneficial to Nietzsche s health. Trans
lator.



118 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

merit for me (a room with a nice warm bed) which
must be peaceful. If possible secure a terrace or flat
roof, either at your lodgings or mine, where you and
I will be able to sit out together, etc.

I do not wish to see any sights, except by accident.
All I want to do is to sit on the Piazza San Marco in
the sunshine and listen to the military band. I always
attend Mass at San Marco on fete days. I shall si
lently roam about the public gardens.

I want to eat good figs and oysters, too, and follow
the example of the man of experience yowrself. I
shall take no meals at the hotel.

I require the utmost calm. I shall bring a few
books with me. Warm baths are to be had at Bar-
bese (I have the address).

You will receive the first complete copy of the book.
Bead it right through again so that in it you may rec
ognize yourself as retouchewr (as well as myself; for,
after all, I too, went to some pains in producing it) .

Good Heavens! it is perhaps my last production.
To my mind it is full of intrepid repose.

If you only knew how well and with what gratitude
I always speak of you! And what hopes I cherish
about you!

Now, for a while, be my good shepherd and medical
adviser in Venice. But it pains me to think that I am
once more going to give you a lot of trouble. I prom
ise you, though, that I shall take up as little of your
time as possible.

With hearty thanks, I am your friend,

NIETZSCHE,



FBIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 119

NIETZSCHE To His MOTHER AND SISTER.

Bale, April 25, 1879.

Since my last card things have gone from bad to
worse, in Geneva as in Bale, whither I returned last
Monday. I had attack after attack both there and
here. Until now I have been quite unable to give
lectures. Yesterday Schiess informed me that my
eyesight had deteriorated considerably since he last
examined it.

Your letters, full of news and encouragement,
reached me while I was still in Geneva. My heartiest
thanks !

F. 1

NIETZSCHE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE EDUCATIONAL

COUNCIL.

Bale, May 2, 1879.
DEAR SIR :

The state of my health, which has forced me to ad
dress so many appeals to you in the past, now urges
me to take this last step and beg you to be so good as
to allow me to resign the post of Professor at the
University which I have held hitherto. All this time
my headaches have increased so much that they are
now scarcely endurable; there is also the increasing
loss of time occasioned by my attacks of illness which
last from two to six days, while I have once more been

Note by Frau F.N.: "In the early part of May I re
ceived a letter from Overbeck begging me on my brother s
behalf to go to him immediately, as he wished to leave Bale
for good. I found that he had changed extraordinarily since
his stay with us the previous autumn, the chief cause of this
being the very poor food he ate as a cure. We went together
to Schloss Bremgarten near Berne."



120 SELECTED LETTERS OP

told by Herr Schiess that my eyesight has again de
teriorated so much so that at present I am scarcely
able to read or write for twenty minutes at a time
without pain. All these considerations force me to
recognize that I am no longer fit for my academic
duties nay, that I am no longer equal to them and
this after having been obliged during the last few
years to allow myself, always much to my regret,
many an irregularity in the discharge of these duties.
It would redound to the disadvantage of our Univer
sity, and to the philological studies pursued therein,
were I any longer to fill a post for which I have ceased
to be suited. Nor can I say that I can any longer
entertain any hope of improvement in the state of
my head, which seems to have become chronically
bad ; as for years I have made attempt after .attempt
to get rid of the trouble, and have led the .most se
verely ordered life, undergoing privations of all kinds
all in vain ! This I am bound to admit to-day, at
a time when I have ceased to believe that I shall be
able to resist my suffering much longer. I have no
other alternative therefore than, in accordance with
paragraph 20 of the University Statutes, with deep
regret to express the desire to be released from jnj
duties, and also tender my thanks to the University
authorities for the many signs of kind indulgence
they have shown me from the first hour of my appoint
ment to the present day.

Begging you, Sir, kindly to convey my desire to
the Board, I am and remain,

Your obedient servant,

DR. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, Prof. o. p.



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 121

NIETZSCHE TO His PUBLISHER.

Bale, Beginning of May, 1879.
DEAR SIR :

I have resigned my professorship and am going into
the mountains. I am on the verge of desperation and
have scarcely any hope left. My sufferings have been
too great, too persistent.

A HALF-BLIND MAN.

RULING OF THE GOVERNING BODY OF BALE UNIVERSITY.

June 14, 1879.

Professor Dr. Friedrich Nietzsche is to be given
leave to resign his post on June 30, 1879, with the
deep thanks of the Governing Board for his excellent
services, together with the grant of a yearly pension
of 1,000 francs for the period of six years.

N. B. The Governors have decided to allow him in
addition for a period of six years a yearly pension
of 1,000 francs from the Hensler Fund, while the
Academic Society has, in the name of a few friends,
guaranteed an additional allowance of from 500 to
1,000 francs for the same period of time. 1



Note by Frau F.N. : "My brother received this pension
which in all amounted to 3,000 francs per annum from July,
1879, to January, 1889. From that date the grant of 1,000
francs per 1 annum from the Governing Board ceased, so that he
received only the 1,000 francs from the Hensler fund and 1,000
francs from the Academic Society. As on various occasions
Professor Overbeck had hinted that the payment of these 2,000
francs was considered a burden at Bale, and my brother had
felt uneasy about the matter from the very beginning, directly
after our mother s death at Easter, 1897, I begged my sick
brother s newly constituted body of guardians to write thanking
the authorities at Bale for their past kindness, and begging
them to discontinue it, as I wished to take sole responsibility
for the dear invalid."



When you read these lines my MS. will already have
reached you ; it may deliver its own request to you ; I
have not the courage to do so. But you must share
a few of the moments of joy that I now feel over my
completed work. I am at the end of my thirty-fifth
year "the middle of life," as people for a century
and a half used to say of this age. It was at this age
that Dante had his vision, and in the opening lines
of his poem he mentions the fact. Now I am in. the
middle of life and so "encircled by death" that at
any minute it can lay hold of me. From the nature
of my sufferings I must reckon upon a sudden death
through convulsions (although I should prefer a hun
dred times a slow, lucid death, before which I should
be able to converse with my friends, even if it were
more painful). In this way I feel like the oldest of
men, even from the standpoint of having completed
my life- task. I have poured out a salutary drop of
oil; this I know, and I shall not be forgotten for it.
At bottom I have already undergone the test of my
own view of life : many more will have to undergo it
after me. Up to the present my spirit has not been
depressed by the unremitting suffering that my ail
ments have caused me; at times I even feel more
cheerful and more benevolent than I ever felt in my
life before; to what do I owe this invigorating and
ameliorating effect? Certainly not to my fellow men ;
for, with but few exceptions, they have all during



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 123

the last few years shown themselves "offended" by
me; 1 nor have they shrunk from letting me know it.
Just read this last MS. through, my dear friend, and
ask yourself whether there are any traces of suffering
or depression to be found in it. / don t believe there
are, and this very belief is a sign that there must be
powers concealed in these views, and not the proofs
of impotence and lassitude after which my enemies
will seek.

Now I shall not rest until I have sent those pages,
transcribed by my self-sacrificing friend and revised
by me, to my printers in Chemnitz. I shall not come
to you myself however urgently the Overbecks and
my sister may press me to do so; there are states in
which it seems to me more fitting to return to the
neighbourhood of one s mother, one s home, and the
memories of one s childhood. But do not take all this
as final and irrevocable. According as his hopes rise
or fall, an invalid should be allowed to make or un
make his plans. My programme for the summer is
complete: three weeks at a moderate altitude (in
Wiesen), three months in the Engadine, and the last
month in taking the real St. Moritz drink-cure, the
best effect of which is not supposed to be felt before
the winter. This working out of a programme was a
pleasure to me, but it was not easy! Self-denial in
everything (I had no friends, no company; I could
read no books; all art was far removed from me; a
small bedroom with a bed, the food of an ascetic
which by the bye suited me excellently, for I have had




124 SELECTED LETTERS OF

no indigestion the whole of the summer) this self-de
nial was complete except for one point I gave my
self up to my thoughts what else could I do! Of
course, this was the very worst thing for my head, but
I still do not see how I could have avoided it. But
enough ; this winter my programme will be to recover
from myself, to rest myself away from my thoughts
for years I have not had this experience. Perhaps
in Naumburg I shall be able so to arrange my day as
to profit by this repose. But first of all the "sequel"
The Wanderer and his Shadow!

Your last letter full of ideas pleased Overbeck and
me so much that I allowed him to take it with him
to Zurich to read to his womenfolk there. Forgive
me for having done this. And forgive me for more

important things !

Your friend,

N.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Naumburg, October 5, 1879.
DEAR FRIEND :

Yesterday morning I posted my card to you; and
three hours later I received fresh proof of your inde
fatigable kindness towards me. If only I could ful
fill your wishes! "But thoughts are too remote/ as
Tieck sings. You would scarcely believe how faith
fully I have carried out the programme of thought
lessness ; and I have reasons for being faithful in this
respect; for "behind thought stands the devil" 1 of a



J This is a playful variation of the Spanish proverb:
Detras de la Cruz estd el diablo." Translator.



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 125

frantic attack of pain. The MS. that reached you at
St. Moritz was produced at such a very heavy price
that probably no one who could have helped it would
ever have written it at such cost. I am now often
filled with horror when reading my own MSS., es
pecially the more lengthy portions owing to the odious
memories they awaken. The whole of it, with the
exception of a few lines, was thought out while walk
ing and scribbled down in pencil in six small note
books ; almost every time I tried to re- write a passage,
I failed. I was forced to omit about twenty some
what lengthy lines of thought. Unfortunately they
were most important; but I had not the time to de
cipher my most illegible pencil scrawl. The same
thing happened to me last summer. I cannot after
wards recall the slender connection of thought. For,
in order to steal away those minutes and quarters
of an hour of "cerebral energy" of which you speak,
I have to rob them from a suffering brain. At pres
ent I feel as if I could never do it again. I read your
transcript, and have all the difficulty in the world in
understanding myself my head is so tired.

The Sorrento MS. has gone to the deuce; my re
moval and final farewell to Bale made many a radical
change in my affairs and it was a good thing for me,
because old MSS. such as those always frown at me
like debtors.

Dear friend, as to Luther, it is a long time since I
have been able with honesty to say anything to his
credit ; this is the outcome of a mass of material about
him to which Jacob Burckhardt called my attention.
I refer to Janssen s "History of the German People"



126 SELECTED LETTERS OF

(Vol. II) that appeared this year (I have it). The
voice in this book is, for once, not that of a Protestant
falsification of history, which is the one we have been
taught to believe. At present, the fact that we prefer
Luther as a man to Ignatius Loyola strikes me as
being no more than our national taste in north and
south! That odious, arrogant, and biliously-envious
diabolical wrangling affected by Luther who was
never happy unless he was able to spit on some one
in his wrath nauseated me beyond endurance. Cer
tainly you are right when you speak of "the promo
tion of European democratization" through Luther,
but this raving enemy of the peasant (who ordered
them to be slaughtered like mad dogs, and himself
assured the princes that the kingdom of Heaven could
be won by the killing and strangling of peasant cat
tle) was certainly one of its most unwilling promo
ters. Yours is, by-the-bye, the fairer attitude towards
the man. But just give me time! Many thanks to
you also for the other lacunae you pointed out to me.
This is most impotent gratitude, I m afraid. Here
again my "wish of wishes" occurs to me. Well, I have
been thinking lately of my friend Gast, not actually
as an author there are so many ways of testifying
to an inward condition of maturity and health at
tained. In the first place of you as an artist ! After
Aeschylus came Sophocles! I would rather not tell
you more plainly what I hope. And now for a word
of truth about you as a creature of brains and heart :
what a start you have of me, making allowance for the
difference of years, and that which years bring with
them! Once more let me tell you a home-truth: I



FKIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 127

consider you a better and more gifted man than I am,
and consequently a man with greater obligations. . . .
With sincere affection,
Your friend whose hopes are in you,

N.



NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Marienbad, July 18, 1880.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

I still cannot help thinking several times a day of
the delightful pampering I had in Venice and of the
still more delightful pamperer, and all I can say is
that one cannot have such good times for long and
that it is only right I should once more be an ancho
rite and as such go walking for ten hours a day, drink
fateful doses of water and await their effect. Mean
while I burrow eagerly inside my moral mines and at
times feel quite subterranean in the process at pres
ent I seem to feel as if I had now discovered the prin
cipal artery and outlet. But this is the sort of belief
that may return a hundred times only to be rejected.
Now and again an echo of Chopin s music rings in my
ears, and this much you have achieved, that at such
moments I always think of you and lose myself in
meditating about possibilities. My trust in you has
grown very great; you are built much more soundly
than I suspected, and apart from the evil influence
that Herr Nietzsche has exercised over you from time
to time, you are in every respect well conditioned.
Ceterum censeo mountains and woods are better than
towns and Paris is better than Vienna.



128 SELECTED LETTERS OF

On the way I made friends with a high dignitary
of the Church, who was apparently one of the earliest
promoters of old Catholic music; he was up to every
question of detail. I found he was much interested
in the work Wagner did in regard to Palestrina s mu
sic. He said that dramatic recitative (in the liturgy)
was the core of Church music, and accordingly wished
the interpretation of such music to be as dramatic
as possible. In his opinion Regensburg was the only
place on earth where old music could be studied and
above all heard (particularly in Passion week).

Have you heard about the fire at MommsenV house
and that his notes have all been destroyed perhaps
the most extensive collection of documents ever made
by a living scholar? It appears that he dashed into
the flames again and again, and that at last, covered
with burns as he was, they were obliged to restrain
him by force. Such tasks as the one Mommsen had
undertaken must be very rare; for the colossal mem
ory and corresponding acumen in criticism and ar
rangement necessary for dealing with such a mass of
material are seldom united in one man ; they are more
often in conflict. When I heard of the affair my heart
was in my mouth with horror, and even now I feel
genuine physical anguish when I think of it. Is that
pity? But what is Mommsen to me? I am in no
way favorably inclined towards him.

Here in the lonely sylvan hermitage of which I
am the hermit, there has been a good deal of trouble



a Note by Peter Gast Fires seem to have marked out
Roman historians as their particular victims. Niebuhr lost the
second volume of his Roman History in a fire which occurred
Feb. 6th, 1830.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 129

ever since yesterday. I do not know exactly what has
happened, but the shadow of a crime seems to lie on
the house. Someone buried something ; others discov
ered it ; a good deal of lamentation was heard ; a num
ber of gendarmes appeared on the scene ; the house was
searched and during the night in the room next door
to mine I heard someone sighing heavily, as if in
great pain, and I could not sleep. Then in the middle
of the night I heard sounds as if something were
being buried in the wood, but whoever was engaged
in the work was surprised, and once more there were
tears and cries. An official told me that it was a
"banknote" affair I am not sufficiently inquisitive to
know as much about my surroundings as all the world
probably knows about me. Suffice it to say that the
solitude of the woods is uncanny.

I have been reading a story by Merimee, in which
Henry Beyle s character is said to be described. It
is called "The Etruscan Vase" ; if this is true, Stend
hal is St. Clair. The whole thing is ironical, distin
guished and deeply melancholic.

In conclusion listen to an idea I have had: one
ceases from loving oneself properly when one ceases
from exercising oneself in love towards others, where
fore the latter (the ceasing from exercising, etc.)
ought to be strongly deprecated. (This is from my
own experience.)

Fare you well, my beloved and much valued friend.
May things go well with you night and day.

Your devoted,

F. N.



130 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Marienbad, August 20, 1880.
MY DEAR FRIEND GAST :

Your letter chimed in with my harvest-, or rather
harvest-festival mood, a little dismally, it is true, but
so well and powerfully that to-day I once more, as
usual, end my meditations about you with the chorale

"What Cast achieved is well achieved,
For just are his intentions. Amen." 1

You are built of stouter material than I am and you
are entitled to set yourself higher ideals. For my
part I suffer terribly when I lack sympathy ; nothing
can compensate me, for instance, for the fact that
for the last few years I have lost Wagner s friendly
interest in my fate. How often do I not dream of
him, and always in the spirit of our former intimate
companionship ! No words of anger have ever passed
between us, not even in my dreams on the contrary,
only words of encouragement and good cheer, and with
no one have I ever laughed so much as with him. All
this is now a thing of the past and what does it
avail that in many respects I am right and he is
wrong? As if our lost friendship could be forgotten
on that account! And to think that I had already
suffered similar experiences before, and am likely
to suffer them again! They constitute the cruellest
sacrifices that my path in life and thought has ex
acted from me and even now the whole of my phi
losophy totters after one hour s sympathetic inter
course even with total strangers! It seems to me so



*An old German hymn: "What God achieves, is well
achieved," etc. Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 131

foolish to insist on being in the right at the expense
of love, and not to be able to impart one s best for
fear of destroying sympathy. Einc meae lacrimae. 1

I am still in Marienbad: the "Austrian weather"
held me fast to the spot ! Fancy, it has rained every
day since July 24, and sometimes the whole day long.
A rainy sky and rainy atmosphere, but fine walks
in the woods. My health lost ground withal; but,
in summa I was well satisfied with Venice and Marien
bad. Certainly, never has so much been thought out
here since the days of Goethe, 2 and even Goethe can
not have let so many fundamental things pass through
his head I surpassed myself by a long way. Once
in the wood a man stared fixedly at me as he passed
me by, and at that moment I felt that my expression
must have been one of radiant joy, and that I had
already worn it for two hours. Like the most modest
of the visitors here, I live incognito; in the visitors
list I appear as "Schoolmaster Nietzsche/ There are
a great many Poles here, and, strange to say, they
insist upon it that I must be a Pole; they actually
come up to me to greet me in the Polish tongue, and
will not believe me when I tell them that I am a
Swiss. "Your race is Polish, but your heart has
turned Heaven knows whither" thus did one of them
mournfully take leave of me.

Your devoted,

F. N.



my tears. Translator.
Goethe frequently visited Marienbad.



132 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To HERR OB. REG. R. KRUG.

Genoa, November 16, 1880.
MY DEAR GUSTAV :

Here in Genoa I received the news of your bereave
ment, and I am just writing a few lines in haste and
unprepared, as the circumstances of travel permit.
But you must regard them more as a sign than an ex
pression of sympathy. By-the-bye, I see from the cal
endar that it is also your birthday. With what wist
ful eyes you will look back upon your life to-day. We
grow older and therefore lonelier ; the love that leaves
us is precisely that love which was lavished upon us
like an unconscious necessity not owing to our par
ticular qualities, but often in spite of them. The cur
tain falls on our past when our mother dies ; it is then
for the first time that our childhood and youth be
come nothing more than a memory. And then the
same process extends; the friends of our youth, our
teachers, our ideals of those days, all die, and every
day we grow more lonely, and ever colder breezes blow
about us. You were right to plant another garden of
love around you, dear friend! I should think that
to-day you are particularly grateful for your lot.
Moreover you have remained true to your art, and it
was with the deepest satisfaction that I heard all you
had to tell me on that score. A period may be dawn
ing which may be better suited to my constitution
than the present one a period in which we shall once
again sit side by side and see the past rise up afresh
out of your music, just as in our youth we used to
dream together of our future in the music we both
loved.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 133

I may not say more. My ailments ( which still con
tinue, as in the past, to have their own daily history)
have laid their tyrannical hand upon me. Whenever
you think of me (as you did for instance on my birth
day, which, this year, I had completely forgotten),
please believe that I do not lack either courage or
patience, and that, even as things are at present, I
aspire to high, very high goals. You may also be
lieve with equal certainty that I am and remain your
friend,

With sincere affection and devotion,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

To ROHDE.

Genoa, March 24, 1881.

Thus the sands of life run out and the best of friends
hear and see nothing of each other ! Aye, the trick is
no easy one to live and yet not to be discontented.
How often do I not feel as if I should like to beg a
loan from my robust, flourishing and brave old friend
Rohde, when I am in sore need of a "transfusion" of
strength, not of lamb s 1 but of lion s blood. But there
he dwells away in Tubingen, immersed in books and
married life, and in every respect inaccessible to me.
Ah, dear friend, to live for ever on my own fat seems
to be my lot, or, as every one knows who has tried it,
to drink my own blood ! Life then becomes a matter
of not losing one s thirst for oneself and also of not
drinking oneself dry.



*At about this time the transfusion of lamb s blood had be
come fashionable in medicine, only to be dropped shortly after
wards. Translator.



134 SELECTED LETTERS OF

On the whole, however, I am, to tell the truth, as
tonished at the number of springs a man can set flow
ing in himself even a man like myself who am not
one of the richest. I believe that if I possessed all
the qualities in which you excel me I should be puffed
up with pride and insufferable. Even now there are
moments when I wander over the heights above Genoa
here with glances and hopes like those which dear
old Columbus may perhaps have cast from this very
spot out over the sea and the whole of the future.
Well, it is with these moments of courage and of
foolishness too, perhaps, that I have to adjust the
equilibrium of my life s vessel for you have no idea
how many daj s, and how many hours, even on en
durable days, I have to overcome, to say the least^

As far as it is possible to alleviate and mitigate a
bad state of health by means of wise living I think
I probably do all that can be done in my case in that
respect I am neither thoughtless nor devoid of ideas.
But I wish no one the lot to which I am growing
accustomed, because I am beginning to understand
that I am equal to it.

But you, my dear good friend, are not in such a
tight corner as to be forced to grow thin in order to
squeeze out of it; neither is Overbeck. You both do
your good work and, without saying overmuch about
it, perhaps without even being conscious of it, derive
all that is good from the midday of life with some
sweat of your brow, too, I suppose. How glad I
should be to have a word or two from you about your
plans, your great plans for with a head and a heart
like yours, behind all the daily routine of work, petty



F R I E D R I C II N I E T Z S C II E 135

enough perhaps, a man always carries something
bulky and very big about with him how happy you
would make me if you held me not unworthy of such
confidence! Friends like yourself must help me to
sustain my belief in myself, and this you do when
you confide in me about your highest aims and hopes.
Beneath these words does there lurk the request for
a letter from you? Well, yes ? dearest friend, I should
rejoice at receiving something really personal from
you once more if only not always to have the Rohde
of the past in my heart, but also the Rohde of the
present and, what is more, the Rohde who is develop
ing and willing yes, the Rohde of the future.

Affectionately yours,
N.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER OAST.

Genoa, 10-4-81.

When I read your letter yesterday "my heart
leaped" as the hymn says it would have been quite
impossible, at the present moment, to have given me
more pleasant news! (The book, for which I have
gradually developed quite a decent appetite, will cer
tainly be in my hands to-day.) Very well, so be it!
We two shall once more come together upon this ledge
of life commanding such a vast prospect, and we shall
be able to look backwards and forwards together and
hold each other s hand the while to show how many,
many good things we have in common many more
than words can tell. You can scarcely imagine how
exhilarating the prospect of this meeting is to me
for a man alone with his thoughts passes for a fool,



136 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and often enough seems a fool to himself into the bar
gain; when two come together, however, "wisdom"
begins, as well as trust, courage, and mental health.
Fare thee well ! With my best thanks,

Your friend,

F. N.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Recoaro, June 19, 1881.

Oh, mv darling sister, you imagine that it is all
about a book? Do you too still think that I am an
author! My hour is at hand! I should like to spare
you all this; for surely you cannot bear my burden
(it is enougli of a fatality to be so closely related to
me) . I should like you to be able to say with a clean
conscience, to each and everyone, "I do not know my
brothers latest views." (People will be only too
ready to acquaint you with the fact that they are "im
moral" and "shameless".) Meanwhile, courage and
pluck; to each his appointed task, and the same old
love!

YOUR F.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, August 14, 1881.

Well, my dear friend ! The August sun is above us,
the year is slipping by, the hills and the w r oods are
growing more calm and more peaceful. Thoughts
have loomed upon my horizon the like of which I have
not known before I shall not divulge anything about
them, but shall remain imperturbably calm. I shall
have to live a few years longer ! Ah, my friend, some-



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 137

times I have a feeling that I am leading a most dan
gerous life, for I belong to the kind of machine that
can fly to pieces. The intensity of my feelings makes
me shudder and laugh once or twice already I have
been unable to leave my room for the absurd reason
that my eyes were inflamed by what? On each oc
casion I had. wept too much on my wanderings the
day before and not sentimental tears by any means,
but tears of joy and exaltation. At such moments I
sang and uttered nonsense, filled with a new vision
which I had seen in advance of the rest of mankind.

After all if I could not draw my strength from
myself; if I had to wait for words of good cheer,
of encouragement, and of comfort from outside, where
should I be, what should I be ! There have indeed
been moments nay, whole periods in my life (the
year 1878, for instance) when I should have re
garded a strong cheering word, a sympathetic hand
shake, as the comfort of comforts and it was pre
cisely then that every one on wham I thought I could
rely, and who could have done me this act of kind
ness, left me in the lurch. Now I no longer expect
it, and all I feel is a certain gloomy astonishment
when, for instance, I think of the letters that reach
me nowadays they are all so insignificant! No one
seems to have gained the smallest experience through
me, or to have thought about me all that people say
to me is decent and benevolent, but so far, far away.
Even our dear old Jacob Burchkardt wrote me a faint
hearted little letter of this sort.

On the other hand I regard it as my reward that
this year has shown me two things that belong to



138 SELECTED LETTERS OF

me and that are intimately related to me I refer
to your music and the landscape before me. This is
neither Switzerland nor Recoaro, but something quite
different; in any case something much more south
ern I should have to go to the Mexican plateau on
the calm ocean, to find anything like it (Oaxaca, for
instance) ; and then, of course, it would be covered
with tropical vegetation. Well, I shall try to keep
this Sils-Maria for myself. And I feel just the same
about your music, but I am quite at a loss to know
how to catch hold of it! I have been obliged to rule
the reading of music and the playing of the piano out
of my occupations once and for all. I have been
thinking of buying a typewriter and am now in cor
respondence with the inventor, a Dane of Copenhagen.
What are you going to do next winter? I suppose
you will be in Vienna. But we must try to arrange
a meeting for the following winter, if only a short one
for now I am well aware that I am not fit to be
your companion, and that your spirit is more free
and more fruitful when I have vanished from your
side. On the other hand, the ever-increasing emanci
pation of your feelings and your acquisition of a deep
and proud understanding, in snmma your joyful, most
joyful industry and development, means so indescrib
ably much to me, that I would readily adapt myself
to any situation created by the needs of your nature.
Never do I have any unpleasant feelings about you
of this you may be quite sure, dear friend! . . .

With hearty affection and gratitude,

YOUR F. N.

(I have often been ill of late.)



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 139

NIETZSCHE TO His MOTHER.
MY DEAR MOTHER : Sils-Maria, August 24, 1881.

. . . I am very well satisfied with my food : Mid
day (11.30 a. m.) every day a dish of meat with ma
caroni; morning (6.30 a. m.) the yolk of a raw egg,
tea, and aniseed biscuit (bucolic and nourishing).
Evening (6.30 p. m.), the yolks of two raw eggs, a
piece of Polenta 1 (as it is eaten by all shepherds and
peasants), tea (second infusion) and aniseed biscuit.
(In Genoa I live much more in conformity with the
customs of the inhabitants, in fact as the work people
live.) Every morning at 5, general ablutions in cold
water, and 5 to 7 hours exercise every day. Between
7 and 9 in the evening I sit still in the dark ( I also
did this at Genoa, where, without exception, I stayed
at home every evening from 6 in the evening onwards ;
never went to a theatre or a concert). You cannot
imagine with what miserly care I have to husband
my intellectual strength and my time, in order that
such a suffering and imperfect creature may yet be
able to bear ripe fruit. [" Do not think ill of me for
leading this difficult sort of life; every hour of the
day I have to be hard towards myself^

With love, YouE R

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, end of August, 1881.
But this is splendid news, my dear friend ! Above
all that you should have finished! At the thought of

*A national dish of Italy. It is made with maize flour.
Translator.



140 SELECTED LETTERS OF

this first great achievement of your life, I feel inde
scribably happy and solemn; I shall not fail to re
member August 24, 1881 ! How things are progress
ing ! But as soon as I think of your work I am over
come by a feeling of satisfaction and a sort of emo
tion which I never experience in connection with my
own " works. (jhere is something in these that al
ways fills me with a sense of shame ; they are counter
feits of a suffering, imperfect nature, but inadequately
equipped with the most essential organs to myself, I,
as a whole, often seem little more than the scratching
upon a piece of paper made by an unknown power
with the object of trying a new pen?) (Our friend
Schmeitzner has understood very well how to make
me feel this, for in every one of his letters of late
he has laid stress on the fact that "my readers do
not wish to read any more of my aphorisms.")^ As
for you, my dear friend, you were not intended to be
such a creature of aphorisms ; }-our aim is a lofty one ;
unlike me you do not feel obliged to let people guess
at the interdependence and at the need of interdepen
dence in your work.") Your mission it is once more
to make known the higher laws of style in your art
those laws the setting aside of which the weakness
of modern artists has elevated almost to a principle :
your mission it is to reveal your art once more quite
complete! This is what I feel when I think of you,
and in this prospect I seem to enjoy the fullest bloom
of my own nature as in a mirage. You alone have
afforded me this joy up to the present, and it is only
since I learnt to know your music that this has been
so between us.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 141

And now for the second piece of news: Vienna is
coming to Venice and the mountain to Mohammed!
What a weight this takes off my mind! Now I see
quite clearly the course things will take, your first
ceremonious introduction I presume you will have
the courage to make known to the world your new
will in aesthetics by means of one or two eloquent
essays, and thus obviate misunderstanding concerning
the only admissible interpretation of your work. Do
not be afraid of confessing yourself vowed to the
loftiest motives! Men like yourself must cast their
words ahead and must know how to orcrtakc them by
their deeds (even I have allowed myself to act on
this principle until now). Avail yourself of all those
liberties which are still granted to the artist alone, and
do not fail to remember that our task is in all cir
cumstances to urge people on, to iirnc them hence
almost irrespective of whether we ourselves get there !
(To my surprise I often find the cxliortatio indirecta
in my last book 1 ; for instance in the 542nd Aphorism
"The Philosopher and Old Age 1 the direct form of
exhortation and instigation, on the other hand, sa
vours somewhat of priggishness.)

So much for to-day it is not at all necessary for
you to answer this, dear friend. When we meet again
you will play me some of your music as an answer
(during the last few months it has percolated right
into my heart, and, honestly, I know nothing I would
like to hear better . . . ) .

Your friend, NIETZSCHE.

This refers to the "Dawn of Day" (Vol. 9 of the English
Authorized Edition).



142 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Genoa, November 28, 1881.

Hurrah ! Friend ! I have made the acquaintance of
one more good thing, an opera by Georges Bizet (who
is he?) : Carmen. It sounded like a story by Meri-
mee ; ingenious, strong, and here and there staggering.
A real French talent for comic opera, absolutely un-
corrupted by Wagner, on the other hand a true pupil
of Hector Berlioz. I thought something of the kind
might be possible. It looks as if the French were on
the road to better things in dramatic music; and they
are far ahead of the Germans in one important point ;
passion with them is not such a very far-fetched af
fair (as all passion is in Wagner s works).

To-day I am not very well, but that is owing to bad
weather and not to the music ; maybe I should be even
worse than I am if I had not heard it. Good things
are my medicine. Hence my love of you !

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Genoa, December 5, 1881.
DEAR GOOD FRIEND :

From time to time (how is this?) it is almost a
need for me to hear something general and absolute
about Wagner, and I like to hear it best of all from
you! To feel alike about Chamfort too ought to be
a point of honour for us both ; he was a man of the
stamp of Mirabeau in character, heart, and magnani
mity ; this was Mirabeau s own opinion of his friend.

It was a great blow to me to hear that Bizet is
dead. I have heard "Carmen" for the second time
and once more I had the impression of a first-class



FBIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 143

story by Merimee, for instance. Such a passionate
and fascinating soul! In my opinion this work is
worth a whole journey to Spain a southern work in
the highest degree ! Do not laugh, old friend, I do not
so easily make an utter mistake in "taste."

With hearty gratitude, yours,

N.

Meanwhile I have been very ill, but am well, thanks
to Carmen.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Genoa, January 29, 1882.
DEAR FRIEND :

Herr von Billow has the ill-breeding of Prussian
officers in his constitution 1 ; he is, however, an "honest
man" the fact that he will no longer have anything
to do with German opera music is accounted for by
all kinds of secret reasons. I remember his once say
ing to me : "I do not know Wagner s later music."
Go to Bayreuth in the summer and you will find the
whole theatrical world of Germany assembled there,
even Prince Lichtenstein, etc., etc., Levi, 2 too. I sup
pose all my friends will be there, my sister as well,



This refers to a note that Hans von Billow wrote to Cast,
when returning the Ms. of a piece of Cast s music entitled,
"Fun, Craft and Revenge," which Cast had sent him. Billow did
not even trouble to look at the music, and wrote in a strain
which implied that he took Cast to be one of the imitatores
put of the servum pecus Wagneri. The letter began: "R. W.
is a phenomenon, and phenomena don t create schools." Cast
thanked him for the information, and returned his letter, saying
that he could not show his respect for Biilow more aptly than
by regarding his letter as unwritten. Nietzsche agreed with
this treatment of the matter. Translator.

*The Conductor.



144 SELECTED LETTERS OF

after your letter of yesterday (and I am very glad of
it).

If I were with you I should introduce Horace s sat
ires and letters to you I feel that we are both ripe
and ready for them. When I glanced into them to-day,
I thought all the expressions were charming, as
charming as a warm winter s day.

My last letter struck you as being "frivolous," didn t
it? Have patience! In respect of my "thoughts," it
is nothing to me to have them but to get rid of them
when I should like to do so is always infernally dif
ficult for me!

Oh, what days we are having ! Oh, the wonder of this
beautiful January ! Let us be of good cheer, dearest
friend !

To HERR. OB. REG. R. KRUG.

Genoa, February, 1882.
DEAR FRIEND:

Your songs affected me strangely. One fine after
noon I happened to think of all your music and musi
cal talent and at last I asked myself why on earth you
did not get something printed. And then my ears
rang with a line from Jung Niklas. The following
morning my friend Ree arrived at Genoa and handed
me your first book, and when I opened it, what was
the first thing I saw but Jung NU:las! This would be
a good anecdote for the Spiritualists! Your music
has qualities which are rare nowadays. In my opin
ion all modern music seems to be suffering from an
ever increasing atrophy of the sense of melody. Mel
ody, as the last and most sublime art of arts, is ruled



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 145

by logical laws which our anarchists would like to
decry as tyranny! But the one thing I am certain
about is that they are unable to reach up to these
sweetest and ripest of fruits. I recommend all com
posers the following most delightful ascetic regimen
for a while to regard harmony as undiscovered, and
to collect a store of pure melodies from Beethoven
and Chopin, for instance. Much of the excellent past
reaches my ears through your music and, as you per
ceive, some of the future as well.

I thank you most heartily.

Yours,
F. N.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Genoa, February 3, 1882.

Just a few lines, my darling sister, to thank you
for your kind words about Wagner and Bayreuth.
Certainly the time I spent with him in Triebschen
and enjoyed through him at Bayreuth (in 1872, not in
1876) is the happiest I have had in my whole life.
But the omnipotent violence of our tasks drove us
asunder and now we can never more be united; we
have grown too strange to each other.

The day I found Wagner I was happy beyond de
scription. So long had I been seeking for the man
who stood on a higher plane than I did, and who
really comprised me. I believed I had found this
man in Wagner. It was a mistake. And now it would
not even be right to compare myself with him I be
long to another order of beings.

In any case I have had to pay dearly for my craze



14(5 SELECTED LETTERS OF

for Wagner. Has not the nerve-destroying power of
his music ruined my health was it not dangerous to
life? Has it not taken me almost six years to recover
from this pain? No, Bayreuth is impossible for me!
What I wrote a day or two ago was only a joke. But
you at all events must go to Bayreuth. Your going
would be of the greatest value to me.

YOUR DEVOTED BROTHER.

To ROHDE.

Tantenberg, July 15, 1882.
MY DEAR OLD FRIEND :

It cannot be helped ; to-day I must prepare you for
a new book from my pen ; you have at most another
month s peace before it will reach you. There is this
extenuating circumstance, that it will be the last
for many a long year for in the autumn I am going
to the University of Vienna to begin student life
afresh, after having made somewhat of a failure of
the old life, thanks to a too one-sided study of philol
ogy. Now I have my own plan of study and behind
it my own secret goal to which the remaining years
of my life are consecrated. I find it too hard to live
if I cannot do so in the grand style this in confidence
to you, my old comrade ! Without a goal that I could
regard as inexpressibly important I should not have
been able to hold myself aloft in the light above
the black floods. This is really my only excuse for
the sort of literature I have been producing ever since
1875; it is my recipe, my self-concocted medicine
against the disgust of life. What years they have
been ! What lingering agony ! What inward strife,



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 147

upheavals, and isolation! Who has ever endured as
much as I? Certainly not Leopardi. And if to-day
I stand above it ally with the courage of a conqueror
and laden with weighty new plans and, if I know
myself, with the prospect of even harder and more
secret sorrows and tragedies, and with the courage to
meet them ! then no one has the right to blame me if
I think well of my medicine. Mihi ipsi scripsi 1 that
settles it. And so let everyone do the best he can for
himself that is my moral the only one I have left.
Even if my bodily health returns, to whom do I owe
this change? In every respect I have been my own
doctor, and as everything in me is one I was obliged
to treat my soul, my mind, and my body all at once
and with the same remedies. I admit that others
would have perished from my treatment, but that is
why I am so eager in warning people against myself.
This last book, which bears the title of "The Joyful
Wisdom," will act as a special danger signal to many,
even to you perhaps, dear old friend Rohde ! It con
tains a portrait of myself and I am convinced it is not
the portrait of me which you carry in your heart.

Well, then, have patience even if only because you
must realize that with me it is "ant mori aut ita vi-
vere"*

Yours very affectionately,

NIETZSCHE,



I have written for myself." Translator.
To die or to live as I do." Translator.



148 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To MADAME LOUISE O.

Naumburg, September, 1882.
VERY DEAR FRIEND :

Or am I not allowed to use this word after six
years?

Meanwhile I have been living nearer to death than
to life, and have consequently become a little too much
of a "sage/ or almost a "saint." . . .

Still, such things may perhaps be cured ! For once
again I believe in life, in men, in Paris, and even in
myself; and very shortly I shall see you again. My
last book is called "The Joyful Wisdom."

Are the skies bright and cheerful in Paris? Do you
happen to know of any room that would suit my re
quirements? It would have to be an apartment silent
as death and very simply furnished and not too far
away from you, my dear Madame. . . .

Or do you advise me not to come to Paris? Perhaps
it is not the place for anchorites and men who wish
to go silently about their life-work, caring nothing
for politics and the present?

You have no idea what a charming memory you
are to me.

Cordially yours,
PROFESSOR DR. F. NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Rapallo, February 1, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND :

. . . But perhaps it would please you to hear
what there is to be finished and printed^ It is a ques
tion of a very small book of about one hundred



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 149

printed pages only. But it is my best work, and with .
it I have removed a heavy__sj;one from my soul. I have I
never done anything more serious or more cheerful ;
it is my hearty desire that this colour which does
not even need to be a mixed colour should become
ever more and more my "natural" colour. The book,
is to be called :

THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA

A Book for All and None

by
F. N.

With this work I have entered a new "Ring"
henceforward I shall be regarded as a madman in
Germany. It is a wonderful kind of "moral lecture."

My sojourn in Germany has forced me to exactly
the same point of view as yours did, dear friend-
that is to say, that I no longer form part of her.
And now, at least, after my Zarathustra, I also feel
as you feel : this insight and the establishing of one s
attitude have given me courage.

Where do ice now belong? Let us rejoice that we
should be allowed to ask ourselves this question at
all!

Our experiences have been somewhat similar; but
you have this advantage over me a better tempera
ment, a better, calmer, and more lonely past and
better health than I have.

Well, then, I shall remain here until the 10th. After
that my address will be Roma, poste restante.

Ever with you in thought and wish, p -j^-

You have delighted the Overbecks and myself as
well!



150 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Kapallo, February 19, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND:

Every one of your last letters was a loon to me;
I thank you for them from the bottom of my heart.

This winter has been the worst I have ever had in
my life, and I regard myself as a victim of a meteoro-
\ logical disturbance. The old flood for the sins of
Europe is still too much for me ; but perhaps some one
may yet come to my rescue and help me up to the
highlands of Mexico. The only thing is that I can
not undertake such journeys; my eyes and one or
two other things forbid it.

&lt;/ The appalling burden which, thanks to the weather,
is now weighing me down (even old Etna has now
begun to rage!) has transformed itself into thoughts
and feelings the pressure of which is frightful; and
from the sudden detachment of this burden, as the
result of the ten absolutely cheerful and bracing days
we had in January, my Zarathustrfy was born, the
\ most detached of all my productions. Triibner is al
ready printing it, and I myself prepared the copy
for press. Moreover Schmeitzner writes to say that
during the last few years all my works have had a
better sale, and I have received many other tokens
of increasing sympathy. Even a member of the Reichs
tag, a follower of Bismarck (Delbrtick 1 ) is said to have
expressed himself in terms of the utmost vexation
over the fact that I lived not in Berlin but in Santa
Margherita !

Rudolf von Delbriick. the Leader of the National Liberal
Party.



FBIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 151

Forgive this chatter; you know what else I now
have in my mind and next my heart. I was very ill
indeed for a day or two, and made my hosts quite
anxious. I am better now and I even believe that
Wagner s death was the most substantial relief that
could have been given me just now. It was hard
for six years to have to be the opponent of the man
one had most reverenced on earth, and my constitu
tion is not sufficiently coarse for such a position. After
all it was Wagner grown senile whom I was forced
to resist; as to the genuine Wagner, I shall yet at
tempt to become in a great measure his Jieir (as I
have often assured Friiulein Malvida, though she
would not believe it). Last summer I felt that he
had alienated all those men from me who were the
only ones in Germany I might have influenced to some
purpose, and had inveigled them into the confused
and wild hostility of his last years.

I need hardly say that I have of course written
to Cosima.

As to what you say about Lou, I could not help
having a good laugh. Do you really believe that in
this matter my taste differs from your own? No,
certainly not! But in the case in point there was
damned little question of "the attraction of loveli
ness or the reverse," but only whether a highly gifted
human being was to be brought to naught or not.

So the proofs may once more be sent to you for
correction, my old and helpful friend? My heartiest
thanks for it all.

F. N.



152 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Genoa, March 22, 1883.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

I saw "Carmen" again last night it was perhaps
the twentieth performance this year; the house was
packed to overflowing as usual; it is the opera of
operas here. You ought to hear the death-like silence
that reigns when the Genoese listen to their favourite
piece the prelude to the fourth act, and the yells
for an encore that follow. They are also very fond
of the "Tarantella." Well, dear old friend, I too was
very happy once again ; when this music is played
some very deep stratum seems to be stirred in me,
and while listening to it I always feel resolved to
hold out to the end and to unburden my heart of its
supremest malice rather than perish beneath the
weight of my own thoughts. During the performance
I did little else than compose Dionysian songs, in
which I made so bold as to say the most terrible
things in the most terrible and laughable manner.
This is the latest form my madness has taken.

Forgive me for writing so often. I have so few
people to confide in now.

Your devoted

F. N.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Genoa, April 27, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND:

. . . And last of all came Wagner s death. What
recollections did not this news bring back to me!
The whole of this relationship and broken relation-



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 153

ship with Wagner has proved my severest trial in
connection with my justice toward people in general,
and of late I had at last succeeded in practising that
"indolence" in this matter of which you write. And
what on earth could be more melancholy than in
dolence, when I think of those times in which the
latter part of "Siegfried" was written! Then we
loved each other and hoped everything for each other
it was truly a profound love, free from all arriere-
pensee. . . .

Your friend,

NIETZSCHE.

To FREIHERR KARL VON GERSDORFF.

Sils-Maria, June 28, 1883.
MY DEAR OLD FRIEND GERSDORFF:

I have just heard of the terrible blow that has
befallen you in the loss of your mother. When I
learnt it, I derived genuine comfort from the thought
that at least you are not alone in life, and called to
mind the cordial and grateful words with which you
spoke to me of your life companion in your last let
ter. You and I have been through some rough times
in our youth rough for many reasons and it would
be only just and proper for our manhood to be
blessed with milder, more comforting and encourag
ing experiences.

As for myself, a long and arduous asceticism of
the spirit lies behind me, which I undertook quite
voluntarily, though it would not be right for every
body to expect it of himself. The last six years have,
in this respect, been the years of my severest efforts



154 SELECTED LETTERS OF

in self-controlfand this is leaving out of all reckoning
what I have had to overcome in the way of ill-health,
solitude, misunderstanding, and persecution.^? Suf
fice it to say that I have overcome this stage in my
life and I shall use all that remains of life (not
much, I imagine) in giving full and complete expres
sion to the object for which I have so far endured
life at all. The period of silence is over. My Zara-
thustra, which will be sent to you in a week or so, will
perhaps show you to what lofty heights my_will has
soared. Do not be deceived by the legendary charac
ter of this little book. Beneath all these simple but
outlandish words lie my whole philosophy and the
things about which I am most in earnest. It is my
first step in making myself known nothing more!
I know perfectly well that there is no one alive who
could create anything like this Zarathustra.

Well, my dear old friend, I am once more in the
Ober-Engadine. This is my third visit to the place
and once again I feel that my proper lair and home
is here and nowhere else. Oh, how much that wishes
to become word and form still lies concealed within
me ! I cannot be too quiet, I cannot stand sufficiently
high up, I cannot be too much alone, if I wish to hear
the voices that are buried deepest within me.

I should like to have enough money to build myself
a sort of ideal dog-kennel I mean, a wooden hut
with two rooms, on a peninsula jutting out into the
Silser Lake, where a Roman castle once stood. Living
in these peasants cottages, as I have done hitherto,
has in the end become unendurable. The rooms are
low and confined, and there is always a good deal



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 155

of noise. Otherwise the people of Sils-Maria are
very kindly disposed to me and I think well of them.
I board at the Edelweiss Hotel, an excellent hostelry.
Of course I take my meals alone there at a price
which is not altogether out of keeping with my slen
der means. I brought a large basketful of books
with me to this place, so I am once more fixed up for
a spell of three months. My Muses live here ; in the
Wanderer and his Shadow I have already said that
this region is "related to me by blood and something
more." . . .

Yours,
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.
Sils-Maria (The Engadine), July 1, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND GAST :

How is it that I have not written to you for such
an age? I have just asked myself this question. But
all this time I have felt so uncertain and irresolute.
A breath of illness still hung about me, and so I did
not wish to write (unfortunately I have written far
too many letters this winter that are full of illness).
Besides which a number of things have gone wrong
with me, for instance, my attempt to find a summer
abode for myself in Italy. I tried first in the Volscian
mountains, and again in the Abruzzi (in Aquila).
What I wonder at now is why, every year about spring
time, I feel such a violent impulse to go ever further
south; this year to Rome, last year to Messina, and
two years ago I was on the very point of embarking
for Tunis when the war broke out. The explanation



156 SELECTED LETTERS OF

must be this, that throughout every winter I suffer
so terribly from the cold (three winters without a
fire!) that with the coming of the warmer weather
a veritable craving for warmth takes possession of
me. This year I felt in addition a craving for the
society of my fellow men. I mean a human kind of
relationship, and particularly for a more human kind
of society than I enjoyed last spring. Truth to tell,
now that I can look back on it all, my lot during
the whole of last year and this winter has been of
the most horrible and forbidding kind; and I mar
vel at the fact that I have escaped it all with my
life I marvel and I shudder, too. In Rome people
showed me plenty of kindness and good nature, and
those who have been good to me are more than ever
so now.

As to Zaratliustra, I have just heard that it is still
"awaiting dispatch" in Leipzig ; even the complimen
tary copies. This is owing to the "very important
conferences" and constant journeyings of the chief
of the Alliance Antijuive, Heir Schmeitzner. On that
account "the publishing business must for once mark
time for a bit," he writes. It really is too ludicrous ;
first the Christian obstruction, the 500,000 hymn
books, and now the anti-Semitic obstruction these
are truly experiences for the founder of a religion.
b Malvida and my sister were astonished to find Za-
\ rathustra so bitter (so embittered) ; I how sweet.
De gustibus, etc. 1

Now I am once again in my beloved Sils-Maria in



"Degustibus non est disputandum." (About tastes people
differ. ) Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 157

the Engadine, the spot where I hope one day to die;
meanwhile it offers me the best incentive to live on.
On the whole I am remarkably undecided, shaken,
and full of questionings; up here it is cold, and that
holds me together and braces me. . . .

I shall be here three months, but after that what?
Oh the future! Nearly every day I wonder how I
shall ever come to hear your music again. I miss
it. I know of so few things that thoroughly refresh
me. But Sils-Maria and your music are among them.

Your last letter contains a number of very fine
thoughts, for which I truly thank myself. After
ward I had another look at Epicurus s bust. Will
power and intellectuality are its most salient charac
teristics.

Your ever heartily devoted,

F. N.

To PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, 13 July, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND :

Since my last letter I have been better, my spirits
have improved, and all of a sudden I have conceived
the second part of "Thus Spake Zarathustra." The
birth followed upon the conception; the whole thing
was worked out with the greatest vehemence.

(While working upon it, the thought struck me that
one day I should probably die from an outburst and
overflow of emotion like this : the devil take me ! )

The MS. will be ready for press the day after to
morrow morning, and my eyes describe limits to my
industrv.



158 SELECTED LETTERS OF

If you read the last page of Zarathustra, Part I,
you will find the words:

" and only when ye have all denied me will I re
turn unto you.

"Verily, with other eyes, my brethren, shall I then
seek my lost ones, with another love shall I then love
you." 1

This is the motto to the Second Part: out of it
as it would be almost foolish to tell a musician, I
evolve different harmonies and modulations from
those in Part I.

It was chiefly a matter of climbing on to the second
rung, in order from this position, to reach the third
(the title of which is "Midday and Eternity." I have
already told you this; but I beg you most earnestly
not to speak about it to anyone. As for the third
part, Fll allow myself some time, and for the fourth,
perhaps years )

If, now, I ask you again kindly to help me with
the correction of my proofs this request exceeds the
bounds of all friendship and decency, and if you can
not contrive to justify me in my request I cannot
contrive to make it !

Your devoted friend,

NIETZSCHE.

To PETER GAST.
MYDEARFKIEND: Sils-Maria, 3rd August, 1883.

Epicurus is precisely the best negative argument in
favour of my challenge to all rare spirits to isolate

See Dr. Levy s English Edition. Vol. XI, p. 90.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 159

themselves from the mass of their fellows; up to the
present the world has made him pay, as it did even in
his own day, for the fact that he allowed himself to
be confused with others, and that he treated the ques
tion of public opinion about himself with levity, with
godlike levity. Already in the last days of his fame,
the swine broke into his garden, and it is one of the
ironies of fate, that we have to believe a Seneca in
favour of Epicurean manliness and loftiness of soul
Seneca, a man to whom one should, on the whole, al
ways lend an ear, but never give one s faith and trust.
In Corsica people say : Seneca e un birbone. 1

Your friend,

NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO His MOTHER.

Sils-Maria, August, 1883.
MY DEAR MOTHER:

I have received everything in the way of food and
the necessaries of life unfortunately, too, your letter,
which made me feel very wretched. Really, these dis
sertations on Christianity and on the opinions of this
man and that as to what I should do and ought to
think on the subject should no longer be directed to
my address. My patience won t stand it ! The atmos
phere in which you live, among these "good Chris
tians," with their one-sided and often presumptuous
judgments, is as opposed as it possibly can be to my
own feelings and most remote aims. I do not say
anything about it, but I know that if people of this

a Seneca is a rascal. Translator.



160 SELECTED LETTERS OF

kind, even including my mother and sister, had an
inkling of what I am aiming at, they would have no
alternative but to become my natural enemies. This
cannot be helped ; the reasons for it lie in the nature
of things. It spoils my love of life to live among
such people, and I have to exercise considerable self-
control in order not to react constantly against this
sanctimonious atmosphere of Naumburg (in which I
include many uncles and aunts who do not live in
Naumburg).

Let us, my dear mother, do as we have done hither
to, and avoid all these serious questions in our let
ters. Moreover, I doubt whether our Lizzie could
have read your letter.

My spirits and health have once more been very
much impaired by the fact that the ghastly affair
of last year is once more abroad and adding woe
to woe. As to the ultimate outcome of it all, as far
as I am concerned, ever since last August I have had
the most gloomy forebodings. I am now working like
a man who is "putting his house in order before de
parting." Don t say any more about it. I shall not
either, and forgive me if this letter has turned out
to be such a melancholy effusion.

Your son,

FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, August 16, 1883.
DEAR FRIEND :

Where do you get all these delightful Epicureaf
I mean not only your Epicurea epigrams but every-



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 161

thing reminiscent of the air and fragrance of Epicu-
rus s garden that has emanated from all your letters
of late. Oh, I am so badly in need of such things
including that divine feat "eluding the masses."
For, truth to tell, / am icell nigh crushed to death.
But let me change the subject.

f The fate of the Island of Ischia 1 makes me more
and more miserable, for apart from those features
about it that concern all men, there is something in
the event that hits very near home where I am con
cerned and in a peculiarly terrible way. This island
was so dear to me; if you have finished the second
part of Zarathustra, where I speak of seeking my
"Happy Isles," this will be clear to you. "Cupid
dancing with the maidens" can only be grasped im
mediately in Ischia (the girls of Ischia speak of "Cu-
pido"). Scarcely have I finished my poem than the
island goes to bits. You remember that the very
hour I passed the first part of Zarathustra for press
Wagner died.^ On this occasion, at the corresponding
hour, I received news that made me so indignant that
there will in all probability be a duel with pistols this
autumn. 2 Silentium! Dear friend!

Meanwhile I have drafted out a plan of a "morality
for Moralists," and readjusted and rectified my views
in many ways. The unconscious and involuntary
congruity of thought and coherence prevalent in the
multifarious mass of my later books has astonished
me; one cannot escape from oneself; that is why one

The gigantic earthquake on July 28, 1883.
"The Lou Ree affair. Translator.



162 SELECTED LETTERS OF

should dare to let oneself go ever further in one s
own personality.

I confess that what I should most like at present
would be for some one else to compile a sort of digest
of the results of all my thought, and thereby draw
a comparison between me and all other thinkers up
to my time. Out of a veritable abyss of the most un
deserved and most enduring contempt in which the
whole of my work and endeavour has lain since the
year 1876, I long for a word of wisdom concerning
myself.

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, August 26, 1883.

How your letter overjoyed me once again, my Ve
netian friend! That is what I call "Lectures on
Greek Culture" to one who needs them and not to an
audience of Leipzig students et hoc genus omne! 1

For a whole year I have been goaded on to a class
of feelings which with the best will in the world I
had abjured, and which at least in their more gross
manifestations I really thought I had mastered; I
refer to the feelings of revenge and "resentment."

The idea of delivering lectures in Leipzig partook
of the nature of despair I wished to find distraction
in the hardest daily toil without being thrown back
on my ultimate tasks. But the idea has already been



And all that class. Translator.



FRIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 163

abandoned, and Heinze, the present Hector of the Uni
versity, has made it clear to me that my attempt at
Leipzig would have been a failure (just as it would
be at all German Universities) owing to the fact that
the Faculty would never dare to recommend me to the
Board of Education in view of my attitude towards
Christianity and the concept of God. Bravo! This
expression of opinion restored my courage to me. 1

Even the first criticism of the first part of Zara
thustra that I have received (written by a Christian
and anti-Semite to boot, and strangely enough pro
duced in a prison) gives me courage, seeing that in
it the popular attitude, which is the only one in me
that can be grasped to wit, my attitude towards
Christianity was immediately, distinctly and well
understood. "Aut Christ us aut Zarathustra!" Or,
to put it plainly, the old long-promised Anti-Christ
has come to the fore that is what my readers
feel. And so all the defenders "of our creed and of
the Saviour of Mankind" are solemnly mustered
("gird up your loins with the sword of the Holy
Ghost"!!) against Zarathustra, and then it goes on:
"If he conquers you, he will be yours and he will be
true, for in him is there nothing false ; if he conquers
you, you will have forfeited your faith; that is the
penance you will have to pay the Victor!"



Teter Cast, commenting on this passage, says: "It is one
of the great ironies of Fate, that the same University which
had once freely granted Nietzsche the Doctor s degree, could
no longer offer him any position when, at a time when his
importance seemed established in the eyes of many, he applied
to them for admission." Translator.

Either Christ or Zarathustra. Translator.



164 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Ludicrous as it may perhaps sound to you, dear
friend, at this point I heard for the first time from
outside that which I have heard from within and have
known for ever so long, namely, that I am the most
terrible opponent of Christianity, and have discovered
a mode of attack of which even Voltaire had not an
inkling. 1 But what does all this "thank God !" mat
ter to you?

What I envy in Epicurus are the disciples in his
garden, aye, in such circumstances one could certainly
forget noble Greece and more certainly still ignoble
Germany! And hence my rage since I have grasped
in the broadest possible sense what wretched means
( the depreciation of my good name, my character and
my aims) suffice to take from me the trust of, and
therewith the possibility of obtaining, pupils. You
will believe me when I say that I have not written a
single line "for the sake of fame"; but I fancied that
my writings might prove a good bait. For, after all,
the impulse to teach is strong in me. And to this
extent I require fame, so that I may get disciples
particularly in view of the fact that, to judge from
recent experiences, a University post is impossible.

Yours,
F. N.



*It should be remembered that the pioneers of enlighten
ment always attacked Christianity on the side of its myths,
its cult, its priesthood, and regarded Christian morality as
unassailable. Nietzsche, on the other hand, attacks the morality
of Christianity, and that for biological reasons; because he con
siders its effects ruinous to the race. Translator.



FBIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 165

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Sils-Maria, End of August, 1883.
MY DEAR SISTER :

To-day, just as it was three days ago, the weather
is perfectly bright and clear and I can survey with
cheerfulness and confidence that which I have and
have not achieved up to the present, and that which
I still expect from myself. You do not know this,
and that is why I cannot take it amiss that you should
wish to see me on other ground, more secure and more

protected. Your letter to made me think a

good deal, and the chance remark you made about
my condition in Bale having certainly been the best
hitherto, made me think even more. I, on the other
hand, judge the matter as follows: the whole mean
ing of the terrible physical suffering to which I was
exposed lies in the fact that, thanks to it alone, I was
torn away from an estimate of my life-task which
was not only false but a hundred times too low. And
as by nature I belong to the modest among men, some
violent means were necessary in order to recall me
to myself. Even the teachers I had as a young man
are probably, in relation to what I have to do, only
minor and transitory forces. The fact that I stood
above them and contemplated their ideals over their
heads above all these Schopenhauers and Wagners
this is what prevented them from being quite in
dispensable to me, and now I could not do myself
a greater injustice than to judge myself according
to these contemporaries whom I have in every sense
overcome. Every word in my Zarathustra is simply
so much triumphant scorn and more than scorn, flung



166 SELECTED LETTERS OF

at the ideals of this period, and behind almost every
word there stands a personal experience, an act of
self-overcoming of the highest order. It is absolutely
necessary that I should be misunderstood; nay, I
would go even further and say that I must succeed
in being understood in the worst possible way and
despised. The fact that those "nearest to me" should
be the first to do this was what I understood last
summer and the following autumn, and by that alone
I became filled with the glorious consciousness of
being on the right road. This feeling may be read
everywhere in Zarathiistra. The dreadful winter, to
gether with my bad health, made me forget it, and
sapped my courage, just as the things which have
happened to me during the last few weeks have
brought me into the greatest danger the danger of
departing from my appointed path. The moment I
am now forced to say: "I cannot endure loneliness
any longer," I am conscious of having fallen to untold
depths in my own estimation of having deserted the
highest that is in me.

What do these Rees and Lous matter ! How can I
be their enemy? And even if they have harmed me,
I have surely derived enough profit from them, if
only from the fact that they are people of such a
different order from myself; in this I find complete
compensation aye, even a reason for feeling grate
ful to them both. They both seemed to be original
people and not copies, and that is why I suffered
their company, however distasteful they were to me.
As regards "friendship" until now I have practised
the most severe abstinence (Schmeitzner declares



FRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 107

that I have no friends, that I "have been left ab
solutely in the lurch for ten years!") In so far as
the general trend of my nature is concerned, I have
no comrades; nobody has any idea when I most need
comfort, encouragement, or a shake of the hand. An
extreme instance of this occurred last year, after my
stay at Tantenburg and Leipzig. And if ever I com
plain the whole world thinks it is entitled to exercise
its modicum of power over me as a sufferer they call
it consolation, pity, good advice, etc.

But men like myself have always had to put up
with the same sort of thing; my purely personal trou
ble is my declining health, which makes itself felt by
a depreciation of my feeling of power and by a lack
of confidence in myself. And as, under this European
sky, I suffer and am low-spirited for at least eight
months in the year, it is a stroke of exceptional luck
that I am able to bear it any longer. What I mean
by luck in this connection is no more than the ab
sence of such strokes of ill fortune as that of last
year that is to say, that no other stones should
enter the works of my watch. For I might perish
from the effects of small stones, because at present
the watch is most highly complicated and the respon
sibility for all the most exalted questions of knowl
edge rests on my shoulders. In summa, to draw some
practical conclusions from these generalities, remem
ber, my dear sister, never to remind me either by
word of mouth or in writing, of those matters that
would deprive me of my self-confidence, aye, almost
of the whole point of my existence hitherto. If these
things affect and have affected me so much, ascribe



168 SELECTED LET TEES OF

it to my health! Cultivate forgetfulness and any
thing else new and quite different from these things,
in order that I may learn to laugh at the loss of such
friends! And remember that his contemporaries can
never be just to a man like myself, and that every
compromise for the sake of "a good name" is unwor
thy of me.

Written under a bright clear sky, with a clear mind,
a good digestion, and the time early morning.

Your BROTHER.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.
Sils-Maria, Monday, September 3, 1883.
MY DEAR FRIEND :

Once again my stay in the Engadine has come to
an end, and I shall leave here on Wednesday for
Germany, where there is much for me to do and to
settle. If you should wish to write to me, direct
the letter to Naumburg; there in my most natural
frame of mind I will rest awhile and recuperate, in
addition to eating a good deal of fine fruit. What
I shall miss there, as everywhere, is your music. I
believe that just as my work makes a stronger and
more discomfiting impression upon you than upon
anyone else, so everything that proceeds from you
has a more soothing effect upon me than upon anyone
else. This is indeed a fine relationship between us!
May be it is the sort of relationship that might exist
between a writer of comedy and a writer of tragedy
(I remember telling you that Wagner saw in me a
writer of tragedy in disguise) ; it is certainly true
that on the whole I come out of it in a more Epicu-



FEIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 169

rean fashion than you do; for thus is the "law of
things." The writer of comedy is of the higher spe
cies, and must do more good than the other, whether
he wants to or not.

This Engadine is the birthplace of my Zarathustra.
Only a moment ago I found the first draft of the
thoughts incorporated in it. And one of the notes
reads as follows : "The beginning of August 1881 in
Sils-Maria, 6,000 feet above the sea, and at a much
higher altitude above all human affairs."

I wonder how the pain and confusion of my spirit
affected the tone of the first two parts! (for the
thoughts and the aims were already fixed). How
strange dear old friend! Quite seriously, I believe,
that Zarathustra turned out to be more cheerful and
happier than he would otherwise have been. I could
prove this almost "docurnentarily."

On the other hand : I should not have suffered, nor
should I suffer still a quarter as much as I have
done, if during the last two years I had not fifty
times over applied the themes of my hermit theories
to practical life, and owing to the evil yea ! terrible
results of this exercise driven myself to doubts con
cerning my very self. To this extent did Zarathustra
wax cheerful at my expense, and at his expense did
I grow overcast with gloom.

By-the-bye, I must inform you, not without re
gret, that now with the third part, poor Zarathustra
is really going to be plunged in gloom so much so,
that Schopenhauer and Leopardi will seem like chil
dren and beginners beside his "pessimism." But the
plan of the work requires it. In order, however, to



170 SELECTED LETTERS OF

be able to write this part, what I shall need, in the
first place, is profound Heavenly cheerfulness for I
shall succeed with the pathos of the highest kind, only
if I treat it as play. (In the end everything becomes
bright, )

Perhaps I shall work at something theoretical mean
while; my notes for this work bear the heading:

THE INNOCENCE OF BECOMING

A finger-post pointing to the deliverance from Mo
rality. . . .
Remain ever true to your friend,

NIETZSCHE.



NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Genoa, November, 1883.
MY DEAR LAMA :

The thought of being reckoned among the authors !
that belongs to the things that make me tremble with
disgust. But, my dear sister, just study "Dawn of
Day" and "Joyful Wisdom/ books whose contents
and whose future are the richest on earth ! In your
last letters there was a good deal about "egoistic"
and "unegoistic," that ought no longer to be writ
ten by my sister. I draw above all a sharp line be
tween strong and weak men those who are destined
to rulership, and those who are destined to service,
obedience, and devotion. That which turns my stom
ach in this age is the untold amount of weakness,
unmanliness, impersonality, changeableness, and
good-nature in short iceakness in the matter of
, which would fain masquerade as "vir-



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 171

tue." That which has given me pleasure up to the
present has been the sight of men with a long will
who can hold their peace for years and who do not
simply on that account deck themselves out with pom
pous moral phraseology, and parade as "heroes" or
"noblemen," but who are honest enough to believe in
nothing but themselves and their will, in order to
stamp it upon mankind for all time.

Excuse me. That which drew me to Richard Wag
ner was this; Schopenhauer, too, had the same feel
ing all his life. . . .

I know perhaps better than anyone else how to rec
ognize an order of rank even among strong men-, ac
cording to their virtue, and on the same principle there
are certainly hundreds of sorts of very decent and
lovable people among the weak in keeping with the
virtues peculiar to the weak. There are some strong
"selves" whose selfishness one might call divine (for
instance Zarathu stra s) but any kind of strength is
in itself alone a refreshing and blessed spectacle. Read
Shakespeare! He is full of such strong men, raw,
hard, and mighty men of granite. Our age is so
poor in these men and even in strong men who
have enough brains for my thoughts!

Do not form too low an estimate of the disappoint
ment and loss I have suffered this year. You cannot
think how lonely and "out of it" I always feel when
I am in the midst of all the kindly Tartufferie of
those people whom you call "good," and how intensely
I yearn at times for a man who is honest and who

can talk even if he were a monster [ ] , but of

course I should prefer discourse with demi-gods.



172 SELECTED LETTERS OF

But once again, forgive me! I am writing you all
this out of the heartiest depths of my heart, and
know very well how very good your intentions are
where I am concerned. Oh, this infernal solitude!

F. N.

P. S. Stein is still too young for me. I should
spoil him. I almost spoilt Gast I have to be most
awfully careful of my Ps and Qs with him.

To ROHDE.

Nice, February 22, 1884.
MY DEAR OLD FRIEND:

I know not how it was, but when I read your last
letter and especially when I saw the charming photo
graph of your child, I felt as if you were shaking me
by the hand gazing at me sadly the while sadly, as
if you meant to say: "How is it possible that we
should have so little in common now, and that we
should be living as if in different worlds ! And there
was a time when "

The same thing, dear friend, has happened in re
gard to all the people I love; everything is over, it
all belongs to the past, it is all merely merciful indul
gence now. We see each other still, we talk in order
to avoid being silent we still write each other letters
in order to avoid being silent. Truth, however
glances from their eyes, and these tell me (I hear it
well enough) : "Friend Nietzsche, you are now quite
alone !"

That s what I have lived and fought for !



FRIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 173

Meanwhile I continue along my road; as a matter
of fact it is a journey, a sea-journey and it is not in
vain that I sojourned for so many years in Colum
bus town.

My Zamthustra has come to an end in its three acts.
You have the first, and the two others I hope to be
able to send you within a month or six weeks. There
is a sort of abyss of the future, something uncanny,
particularly in his supreme happiness. Everything
in it is my own, independent of all example, parallel,
or predecessor. He who has once lived in its atmos
phere returns to this world with another face.

But of this one should not speak. From you,
however, as a homo litcratus I shall not withold a
confession : I have the idea that with this Zarathustra
I have brought the German language to its acme of
perfection. After Luther and Goethe there still re
mained a third step to be taken just ask yourself,
dear old comrade, whether power, suppleness, and
euphony have ever before been united in this way in
our language. Read Goethe after having read a page
of my book and you will find that that "undulating
quality," which Goethe as a draughtsman possessed,
was not unknown even to the word-painter. It is in
my more severe and more manly line that I excel
him, without, however, descending to the coarse mob
with Luther. My style is a dance, a play of all kinds
of symmetries, and a vaulting and mocking of these
symmetries. And this even extends to the choice
of vowels.

Forgive me! I shall take care not to make this
confession to anyone else, but once, I believe, you



174 SELECTED LETTERS OF

alone expressed the pleasure my style had given you.

Moreover I have remained a poet to the utmost
limits of this concept, although I have already tyran
nized over myself thoroughly with the reverse of
everything that could be called poetry.

Ah, dear friend, what an absurdly silent life I
lead ! So much alone, so much alone ! So "childless" !

Remain fond of me ; I am truly fond of you.

Yours,

F. N.



NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

[December 10, 1885]

Nice (France) Rue St. Frangoisde Paule, II, 26.
DEAR FRIEND:

You may perhaps receive a letter that I addressed
to you in Vienna ( provided that you left, or intended
to leave, your Annaberg address with the postc res-
tante of the principal post office there.) After all, I
marvel at the sort of "parallelism" that has charac
terized our experiences and zig-zag journeys this year
so much indeed that I almost rejoice at the thought,
for, as the result of it all, I feel imbued with a gen
eral feeling of peace and gentle indifference, wliich I
hope may be your reward also. At present there is
not a soul in Germany who has an inkling of what
I want, or of the fact that I want anything at all,
or even that I have already attained a not insignifi-



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 175

cant portion thereof. There is not a soul who at
heart is either well pleased, or anxious, or distressed,
or anything whatsoever, about the "things" that I
hold dear. But, after all, perhaps to be aware of this
alone is an invaluable piece of insight, and with it one
has approached quite near to Epicurus s garden, and
above all to oneself after it, one jumps with a mighty
spring back to oneself. Let us continue to do that
which ice enjoy doing that which gives us a clean
conscience about ourselves; for the rest, silence or
gloria, "as God may please."

Something must be discovered and thought out by
means of which the next few years may be made se
cure and no longer full of dangerous accidents. In
saying this it is you I have in mind, dear friend. It
is quite proper that you should first try Carlsruhe.
Whether you succeed there or not, you ought immed
iately afterwards again to look about you for a quiet
haunt. I have come to the sad though obvious con
clusion that the depression that would overtake you in
the event of another failure ought to drive you to
Venice as the only spot on earth that suits you.
Although I allowed myself to recommend Nice to
you in my last letter, I was quite well aware of the
principal obstacle in the way of your coming, and
of your reasons for fearing that you would not be
enough of a hermit here. Bear in mind, however, that
the four months that I probably spend here every
year, only make up a third of the year, and, secondly,
that for me these four months are precisely my work
ing period, during which I keep out of the way of
"mankind," and perhaps of friends as well ; above all,



176 SELECTED LETTERS OF

consider that the friend you would find here is one
with whom one can conclude a strict arrangement,
and who takes an almost personal interest in all the
conditions,, whether of your work or your life. Be
sides there is this to be said for Nice: it is a place
in which one can live the whole year round you will
find it much more exhilarating than Venice in sum
mer, thanks to the cool sea-breezes at night. Nice is,
moreover, from an aesthetic point of view, the reverse
of Venice, as southern cities go ; it seems to me to be
worth your while to try it, just to see what the Muses,,
or the mistral, or the luminous heavens would have to
tell you here. Thirdly, you can live more cheaply
here than at any other place on the Eiviera; Nice
is a large open-hearted place, with attractions for all.
Prices are naturally higher during the winter; they
tell me that during the summer they fall 50 per cent.
Nevertheless, even in the winter, I could recommend
you some respectable restaurants, where your food
would be such as you are used to having in Venice,
but if anything cheaper and better. It is a heavenly
blessing that you have not got the luxurious tastes
of the majority of artists, and that your most esti
mable life also reveals the virtues of simplicity and
thriftiness. Later on,, of course, you will be a rich
man, but the thing which is all important now is that
you should be spared the care of this "later on."
Your art requires that you should be free from worry;
is that not so, my dear friend?

Yours,

N.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 177

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER AND BROTHER-IN-LAW.
Nice, After Christmas, 1885.

MY DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER :

The weather is perfect, and so your "famous ani
mal" 1 must also assume a pleasant countenance, al
though it has had many a sad day and night. Christ
mas, however, was a regular day of rejoicing for me.
At midday I received your kind presents, and lost no
time in putting the chain round my neck; while the
nice little calendar found its way into my waistcoat
pocket. But the money must certainly have slipped
out, if there really were money in the letter (and
mother says there was.) Forgive your blind animal
for this! I unpacked my treasure in the street, and
something may certainly have fallen out, for I fum
bled very eagerly for the letter. Let us hope that
some poor old woman was not far off, and that she
thus found her "Christinas stocking" filled in the
street. I then drove to my peninsula St. Jean, ran
a long way along the coast, and at last sat down
among some young soldiers who were playing skit
tles. Fresh roses and geraniums adorned the hedges
and everything was green and warm; nothing north
ern! Then your famous animal drank three quite
large glasses of a sweet local wine, and w r as just the
slightest bit top-heavy; at least, not long afterwards,
when the breakers drew near to me, I said to them
as one says to a bevy of farmyard fowls, "Shsh!

*Note by Frau F.N.: "When my brother came to stay with
us at Naumburg in the Autumn of 1885, it occurred to us to
nickname him our famous animal "



178 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Shsh! Shsh!" Then I drove back to Nice, and re
galed myself in princely fashion at dinner in my
pension. A large Christmas tree was also lighted up.
Just think, I have discovered a boulanger de luxe
who understands what cheesecakes are. He said that
the King of Wurtemberg had ordered one of these
cakes for his birthday. It was the word "princely"
that brought this to my mind.

Ever your loving,
F.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Nice, February, 1886.
MY DEAR OLD LAMA :

Your kind and cheerful proposition has just
reached me. If by any chance it could serve the pur
pose of giving your husband a good opinion of the
incorrigible European and anti-antisemite, your ut
terly heterodox brother and "Jack-in-the-Corner"
Fritz (although Dr. Forster had certainly other
things to think of without troubling about me), I
would willingly tread in Fraulein Alwinchen For-
ster s footsteps, and beseech you to convert me into a
South American landowner on the same lines and
conditions. I must, however, stipulate most emphati
cally that the plot of land be called not Frederickland
or Frederickwood (for, to begin with, I do not wish to
die yet and be buried there) but, in memory of the
name I have given you Lamaland.

Joking apart, I would send you everything I pos
sess if it w T ould help to get you back here soon. Gen
erally speaking, everybody who knows you and loves



FRIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 179

you is of opinion that it would have been a thousand
times better for you to have been spared this experi
ment. Even if that country were found to be ever so
well suited to German colonization, no one would ad
mit that precisely you two ought to be the colonizers.
The fact that you should be seems to be the result
of an absolutely arbitrary choice excuse the expres
sion! it is moreover dangerous, particularly for a
lama who is accustomed to a gentle culture and pros
pers and capers about best in such an environment.
The whole of this heating up of feelings, constituting
as it does the cause of the whole affair, is too tropical
and, in my opinion, not even wholesome for a Lama
(or to speak more accurately, for the whole of our
real family type, whose art lies in the reconciliation
of contrasts.) One keeps one s beauty and youth
longer when one neither hates nor feels mistrustful.
After all, I cannot help thinking that your nature
would prove itself more useful in a truly German
cause, here in Europe, than over there particularly
as the wife of Dr. Forster, who, as I thought once
more on reading his Essay on Education, would really
find his natural mission as a Director of Education
at a place like Schnepfenthal 1 and not (forgive your
brother for saying so) as an agitator in that anti-
Semitic movement which is three-quarters rotten. The
things most urgently needed in Germany at present
are precisely independent Educational Institutions,
which would actively compete ivith the slave-drilling
education of the State. The confidence that Dr. Fors-

*A kind of religious school. Translator.



180 SELECTED LETTERS OF

ter enjoys vis-a-vis the nobility of northern Germany,
would seem to be a sufficient guarantee that a sort
of Schnepfenthal or Hofwyl (do you remember?
the place where Vischer was educated), would suc
ceed under his direction. But right out there, among
peasants, in close proximity to Germans, who have
become impossible, and are probably embittered and
poisoned at heart enough, what a wide field this
provides for worry and anxiety ! The big stupid ocean
between us! and whenever, here, we get news of a
hurricane, your brother grows angry and agitated,
and cudgels his brains to discover how on earth it
ever occurred to the Lama to embark upon such an
adventure. I do the best I can to bear up, but every
day, and more particularly at night, I am overcome
by incomparable sadness always, simply owing to
the fact that the Lama has run away and has com
pletely broken with her brother s tradition.

I have just heard from the Court Orchestra Con
ductor of Carlsruhe (to whom I had written a line
to please poor G.) that my recommendation ("the rec
ommendation of a man whom I admire enthusiastical
ly") had prepossessed him most favourably towards
the work, and while I am rejoicing over this news, it
occurs to me that you will say, "He is of course a
Jew!" 1 This, in my opinion, proves how the Lama
has leaped aside from her brother s tradition : we no
longer rejoice about the same things. Meanwhile it
cannot be helped. Life is an experiment ; one can do
what one likes, and one has to pay too dearly for



This was a mistake." Note by Frau F.N.



PRIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 181

everything. Onward, my dear old Lama ! And may
you face what you have resolved to face, with cour
age!

YOUR F.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Sils-Maria, July 8, 1886.
MY DARLING LAMA :

I have ceased to be in favour of the idea of living
for good in Leipzig or Munich; life in such circles
demands too heavy a toll on my pride ; and after all,
however much I "belittle" myself, I still do not at
tain to that cheerful and comforting courage and self-
reliance which are necessary for the continued pur
suit of my path in life attributes which at all events
spring into existence more readily in Sils and in
Nice than in the places above mentioned. How many
humiliations and acts of foolishness did I not have
to swallow down during my last stay in Germany, and
without my friends ever dreaming of anything of the
sort! No they one and all "mean well" by me. I
endured hours of spiritual depression that I can re
member only with a shudder. The humiliating experi
ences of the autumn of 1882, which I had almost for
gotten, came back to my mind, and I recollected with
shame the type of humanity I had already treated as
my equal! Wherever I turned I was confronted by
opinions utterly opposed to my own to my great as
tonishment, however, not about Wagner. Even Kohde
has refused to have anything to do with Parsifal.

Where are those old friends with whom in years
gone by I felt so closely united? Now it seems as



182 SELECTED LETTERS OF

if we belonged to different worlds, and no longer
spoke the same language! Like a stranger and an
outcast, I move among them not one of their words
or looks reaches me any longer. I am dumb for no
one understands my speech ah, but they never did
understand me ! or does the same fate bear the same
burden on its soul? It is terrible to be condemned to
silence when one has so much to say [...]
Was I made for solitude or for a life in which there
was no one to whom I could speak? The inability
to communicate one s thoughts is in very truth the
most terrible of all kinds of loneliness. Difference
is a mask which is more ironbound than any iron
mask and perfect friendship is possible only inter
pares! Inter pares! 1 an intoxicating word; it con
tains so much comfort, hope, savour, and blessedness
for him who is necessarily always alone ; for him who
is "different"; who has never met anyone who pre
cisely belonged to him, although he has sought well
on all &gt;orts of roads; who in his relationship to his
fellows always had to practise a sort of considerate
and cheerful dissimulation in the hope of assimilating
himself to them, often with success, who from all too
long experience knows how to show that bright face
to adversity which is called sociability and some
times, too, to give vent to those dangerous, heart
rending outbursts of all his concealed misery, of all
the longings he has not yet stifled, of all his surging
and tumultuous streams of love the sudden madness
of those moments when the lonely man embraces one



1 Amongst equals. Translator.



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 183

that seems to his taste and treats him as a friend,
as a Heaven-sent blessing and precious gift, only to
thrust him from him with loathing an hour later, and
with loathing too for himself, as if he had been con
taminated and abased, as if he had grown strange even
to himself, as if he had fallen from his own company.
A deep man needs friends. All else failing, he has
at least his god. But I have neither god nor friends !
Ah, my dear sister, those you call by that name were
certainly friends once but now? For instance

[...].

. . . Now I ought once more to give myself a
little rest, for the spiritual and intellectual tension
of the last few years has been too severe, and my
temper has grown sharper and more gloomy. My
health is really quite normal but my poor soul is so
sensitive to injury and so full of longing for good
friends, for people "who are my life." Get me a small
circle of men who will listen to me and understand

me and I shall be cured!

Your FRITZ.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

DEAE FEIEND : ^ ^^ Tuesday, July 20, 1886.
. . . Assuming that you prefer a solitary visit
to the places in question, allow me to send a few ad
dresses where you can find cheap quarters. In Ra-
pallo, for instance (whence you will be able to ex
plore Santa Margherita and Portofino) I would rec
ommend the cheap little Albergo della Posta, right
on the sea-front, in which the first part of Zarathustra
was written. Oh what a joy it would be for me to



184 SELECTED LETTERS OF

be allowed to act as cicerone to you there and in
Genoa and you would have to try all my modest
trattorias! And we would climb about the gloomy
bastions together and drink a glass of Monteferrato
on my Belvedere in Sampierdorena ! Honestly, I can
think of nothing that would give me so much pleas
ure. This bit of Genoa is a piece of my past towards
which I feel respect ... it was terribly solitary
and severe. . . .

I have not quite settled down yet here in Sils ; these
sudden transitions do not suit my health. The print
ing of my book is oppressing me to the extent of be
coming irksome. I shall have complete freedom (and
leave to think of something new) only when I see the
first finished copy that is to say, in three weeks per
haps. I had to make fresh plans for the fourth page
of the wrapper ( I trust the agreement between
Schmeitzner and Fritzsch will soon be concluded, pro
vided that Schmeitzner never hears to what extent
I am informed as to Fritzsch s intentions. )

How funny! However well one tries to beware of
the emancipation of women it is of no use! I have
encountered another classical specimen of the literary
female, Miss Helen Zinimern (the woman who intro
duced Schopenhauer to the English.) I believe she
has even translated "Schopenhauer as an Educator."
Of course she is a Jewess; it is amazing to see the
extent to which this race now has the spirituality of
Europe in its hands (to-day she talked to me for a
long time about her race). . . .

Your friend,
N.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 185

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

About 400 metres above the sea, overlooking the
street leading across the arch of Portofino.

Euta Ligure, October 10, 1886,
DEAR FRIEND:

Just a line from this wonderful corner of the globe,
where I should prefer to see you rather than in your
present quarters in Munich. Imagine an island of
the Greek Archipelago, arbitrarily covered with woods
and hills, which owing to some accident one day swam
close up to the mainland and was unable to swim
back again. There is certainly something Greek about
it; while it is also somewhat piratical, unexpected,
covert, and dangerous in character. Finally when
at a bend in the road one comes upon a little tropical
forest of palms, which makes one feel very far from
Europe, it is a little reminiscent of Brazil at least,
that is what my table-companion says, and he has
been round the world several times. I have never
lived so long in genuine Robinson Crusoe insularity
and oblivion. Frequently too I have set great fires
burning in front of me. To watch the pure restless
flame, with its white-grey belly, rear itself against
the cloudless sky with heather growing all round,
and the whole steeped in that October blissfulness
which is such a master in the matter of yellows. Oh,
dear friend, such early autumn happiness would be
just the thing for you, as much if not more than it
is for me! ...

Your devoted friend,

NIETZSCHE.



186 SELECTED LETTEBS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Nice (France), January 21, 1887,
Rue des Poncbettes 29. Au premier.

DEAR FRIEND:

. . . Ever since the spring of last year, Levi 1
has made the best impression upon me. What I have
since heard from another quarter, in Munich, has con
firmed the fact that he has neither lost nor wishes to
lose a kind of relationship with me (he calls it grati
tude) ; and this holds good of all Wagnerians (al
though I cannot quite explain it). Seydlitz (now
President of the Wagner Society) informs me that
they waited for me in Munich last autumn with "fev
erish tension." Incidentally, in the Engadine, my
neighbour at table was the sister of the Barber of
Bagdad; do you understand this abbreviated expres
sion?

To conclude I have just heard the Overture to
Parsifal for the first time (and in Monte Carlo!).
When I see you again I will tell you exactly what
it conveyed to me. Moreover, apart from all irrele
vant questions (as to what the use of this music can
or ought to be) and on purely aesthetic grounds; has
Wagner ever done anything better? This music re
veals the very highest psychological consciousness and
certainty with regard to what it intended to say, ex
press, convey ; it selects the shortest and most direct
means to this end, every nuance of feeling being car
ried to the point of epigram. As descriptive music it



Hermann Levi, Conductor of the Court Chapel at Munich.



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 187

is so lucid, that to listen to it is to be forcibly re
minded of a shield wrought all over with noble de
vices, and finally it is full of such a sublimity and
rarity of feeling, of experience and of spiritual
events at the very basis of music, that it does Wagner
the greatest credit; it contains a synthesis of states
which to many men, even "higher men," it would seem
impossible to unite, and is of a commanding sever
ity, of a "loftiness" in the most terrifying sense of
the word, and of an omniscience and penetration that
seem to transpierce one s soul with knives and with
al it is full of pity for that which it sees and orders
there. This sort of thing is to be found in Dante,
but nowhere else. I wonder whether any painter
has ever depicted such a sad look of love as Wagner
has given us in the last accents of his overture?

Your devoted friend,

NIETZSCHE.


DEAR FRIEND:

Fortunately your letter, as far as your own case is
concerned, did not by any means prove quod erat dem
onstrandum; otherwise, however, I admit all you say,
the disastrous effects of a grey sky, the prolonged
damp cold, the proximity of Bavarians and of Bavar
ian beer I admire every artist who turns to face
these foes not to speak of German politics, which



188 SELECTED LETTERS OF

are only another form of permanent winter and bad
weather. It seems to me that Germany for the last
fifteen years has become a regular school of besotment.
Water, rubbish and filth, far and wide that is what
it looks like from a distance. I beg a thousand par
dons if I have hurt your more noble feelings in speak
ing in this way, but for present-day Germany, how
ever much it may bristle, hedgehoglike, with arms,
I no longer have any respect. It represents the stupi
dest, most depraved and most mendacious form of the
German spirit that has ever existed and what ab
surdities has not this spirit dared to perpetrate! I
forgive no one for compromising with it in any way,
even if his name be Richard Wagner, particularly
when this compromise is effected in the shamefully
equivocal and cautious manner in which this shrewd,
all-too-shrewd glorifier of "reine Thorheit" 1 has ef
fected it in the latter years of his life.

Here in our land of sunshine what different things
we have in mind! Only a moment ago Nice was in
the middle of her long international carnival (inci
dentally with a preponderance of Spanish women)
and immediately after it was over, six hours after
the last Girandola, there followed some more new and
rarely tasted charms of existence. For we are all
living in the interesting expectation of being swal
lowed up thanks to a well-meaning earthquake,
which caused howling far and wide not only among
dogs. You can imagine what fun it is to hear the



"Pure foolishness." This is a reference to Wagner s
Parsifal. See my note on the "Pure Fool," page 96, of The Will
to Power, Vol. I. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 189

houses rattling over one s head like coffee-mills, to
watch the inkstands beginning to show signs of free
will, while the streets fill with horrified half-dressed
figures and unhinged nervous systems. This morning,
from about two to three o clock, like the gaillard I
am, I made a round of inspection in the various quar
ters of the town, in order to ascertain where the fear
was greatest. For the inhabitants camp out in the
open night and day, and it looks delightfully martial.
In the hotels where there is much damage, panic of
course reigns supreme. I found all my friends, male
and female, lying pitifully beneath the green trees,
well swathed in flannels, for it was very cold, and,
at the slightest sign of a vibration, thinking gloomily
of the end. I should not be surprised if this brought
the season to a sudden conclusion. Everyone is think
ing of leaving (provided of course they can get away
and the railways are not all torn up). Already yes
terday evening the visitors at the hotel where I board
could not be induced to partake of their table-d hote
inside the house, but ate and drank in the open, and
but for an exceedingly pious old woman who is con
vinced that the Almighty has absolutely no right to
injure her, I was "the only cheerful being among a
host of masks." 1

I have just got hold of a newspaper containing a
description of this awful night, which is far more
picturesque than the one your humble friend has been



" Unter Larven die einzige Fiihlende Brust." These words
are a quotation from a well-known poem of Schiller s conveying
the idea of a jolly fellow being alone amongst a lot of wooden
creatures. Translator.



190 SELECTED LETTERS OF

able to give you. I am enclosing it in this letter.
Please read it to your dear wife, and bear me in
mind.

Your devoted
NIETZSCHE.



NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Nice, Monday, March 7, 1887.

DEAR FRIEND :

I have just had a visit from a philologist whose
previous history has not been unlike my own a Dr.
A., brought up in the school of Rohde and von Gut-
schmidt and very much esteemed by his teachers but
passionately disgusted with and opposed to all philo
logy. He fled to me "his master" for he is deter
mined to devote himself absolutely to philosophy, and
now I am urging him to go slowly, quite slowly, to
make no blunders, and not to allow himself to be
carried away by any false examples. I believe I am
succeeding in "disappointing" him. I heard inciden
tally from him, how even in the University of Tubin
gen, where I pass for the most negative of spirits, my
works are eagerly devoured in secret. Dr. A. is half
American, half Swabian.

The same thing happened to me with Dostoiewsky
as with Stendhal; the most haphazard encounter, a
book that one opens casually on a book stall, and the
very title of which is unknown to one and then sud-



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 191

denly one s instinct speaks and one knows one has
met a kinsman. 1

Up to the present I have learnt little concerning his
position, his reputation and his history; he died in
1881. In his youth things were pretty bad with him ;
he was delicate and poor, although he came of distin
guished stock. At the age of twenty-seven he was
sentenced to death, but was reprieved on the very
steps of the scaffold, whereupon he spent four years
in chains in Siberia amid criminals of the worst type.
This formed the decisive period in his life. It was
then that he discovered the power of his psychological
intuition; nay more, his heart was mellowed and
deepened by the experience. His reminiscences of this
period "La maison des Morts," is one of the most
human books in existence. The first of his works
that I read was a French translation entitled "L es-
prit souterrain," consisting of two stories: the first a
kind of unknown music, and the second a real stroke
of genius in psychology a terrible and cruel piece of
mockery levelled at yvcodi acnrcov, 2 but done with
such a light and daring hand, and with so much



Speaking of Dostoiewsky, in a letter to Cast dated 13th
Feb., 1887, Nietzsche says: "Do you know Dostoiewsky? "V^ith
the exception of Stendhal, no one has given me so much pleas
ure and astonishment: a psychologist whom I agree with."
Cast s comment on this is as follows: "Nietzsche s high appre
ciation of D. has been greatly misunderstood, as if N. had
discovered similar lines in Dostoiewsky as in himself. This,
however, is not the case. What N. admired in D. was his in
sight into the depths of certain human souls, his art and the
subtlety of his analysis, and the collection of rare psychological
material. N. felt that D. instructed him and enriched him as a
psychologist, otherwise D. was repellent to his instincts."
Translator.

"Know yourself."



192 SELECTED LETTERS OF

of the rapture of superior strength, that I was almost
intoxicated with joy. Meanwhile, on the recom
mendation of Overbeck, whom I asked about the
matter, I have read "Humilies et offenses" (the only
one that O. knew) with the greatest respect for the
artist Dostoiewsky. I have also observed how com
pletely the youngest generation of Parisian novelists
are tyrannized over by the influence of Dostoiewsky,
and by their jealousy of him (Paul Bourget, for in
stance).

I shall stay here until April 3, without, I trust,
seeing any more of the earthquake. For Dr. Falb is
warning people to beware of March 9, when he ex
pects a renewal of the phenomena in our district ; he
also mentions March 22 and 23. Up till now I have
remained fairly cool, and have lived with a feeling of
irony and cold curiosity among thousands of people
grown crazy with fear. But one cannot stand se
curity for oneself and perhaps in a few days I shall be
less rational than anyone. The element of sudden
ness, I imprevu, has its charm. . . .

How are you? You cannot think what a lot of
good your last letter did me ! You are so brave !

Your devoted friend,
N.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Nice, Wednesday, March 23, 1887.
MY DEAR LAMA :

It is now difficult to help nie. When one has been
at great pains for half one s life to secure independ-



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 193

ence for one s self, as I found it necessary to do, one
has to accept the disadvantages of the situation as
well. One cannot have the one without the other.
Among these disadvantages is the fact that no one
can tell from appearances what are the things I lack.
I should like to have a little more money in order,
for instance, that in the interests of my declining
health, alone, and with the view of avoiding innumer
able mistakes in dieting that I am exposed to in res
taurants and hotels, I might have my own kitchen. It
is also a question of pride; I should like to lead a
life that really is suitable to me, and does not look
so conventional as that of "a scholar on his travels."
But even the five conditions that might make life en
durable, and are really not pretentious, seem to me
impracticable. I require (1) Some one to superin
tend my digestion, (2) Somebody who can laugh with
me and who has cheerful spirits, (3) Some one who
is proud of my company and who constrains others
to treat me with becoming respect, (4) Some one who
can read aloud to me without making a book sound
idiotic. There is yet a fifth condition; but I will
say nothing about it.

To marry now would perhaps be simply an act of
folly, which would immediately deprive me of the in
dependence that I have won with such bloody strife.
And then I should also have to choose some European
State, to belong to and become a citizen of it. I
should have to consider my wife, my child, my wife s
family, the place I lived in, and the people we as
sociated with, but to forbid myself the free expres
sion of my ideas would kill me. I should prefer to be



194 SELECTED LETTERS OF

miserable, ill, and feared, and live in some out of the
way corner, than to be "settled" and given my place
in modern mediocrity! I lack neither courage nor
good spirits. Both have remained with me because
I have no acts of cowardice or false compromise on
my conscience. Incidentally I may say that I have
not yet found a woman who would be suited to asso
ciate with me, and whose presence would not bore
me and make me nervous. (The Lama was a good
housemate for whom I can find no substitute, but it
wanted to vent its energy and to sacrifice itself. For
whom? For a miserable foreign race of men, who will
not even thank her and not for me. And I would
be such a grateful animal, and always ready for merry
laughter. Are you still able to laugh at all? I am
afraid that you will quite forget how to do it among
these embittered people. ) Moreover I know the women
folk of half Europe, and wherever I have observed
the influence of women on men, I have noticed a sort
of gradual decline as the result; for instance in the

case of poor . Not very encouraging is it?

I shall leave Nice at the beginning of next month
in order to seek peaceful retirement on Lake Mag-
giore, where there are woods and shaded groves, and
not this blindingly white incessant sunshine of Nice
in the spring ! The address is : Villa Badia, Cannobio
(Lago Maggiore), but before this letter reaches you
who knows where I shall be?

With love,
Your F.



Here I am in a magnificent spot, and every morn
ing I marvel at the glory of the colouring. The noble
cloisterly nature of the situation and the arrange
ments also pleases me and yet I am so out of sorts
that I feel as if I could no longer be heartily glad
about anything. Nothing comes to me from the out
side world to give me courage or strength. My fel
low-boarders are incomparably tedious! In that re
spect I was better off in Nice this winter. There
were a few people there who interested me. Our dear
mother will have written to you all about it.

And now about yourself, my dear Lama! I was
very much impressed by the purchase of this huge
piece of land, "larger than many a German princi
pality." But I must confess that I am absolutely at
sea about the whole affair. If I understand anything
at all, it is that the real owner of that vast complex
of territory is that rich Paraguayan who is so friendly
with Forster. This would not prevent him from wish
ing to serve his own interests by means of this "Ger
man colony." He is certainly bent on turning it to
his own profit. Now the principal thing to me seems
to be, not that the colony should be inhabited, but
that it should do some business, sell wood, etc. For
without that I absolutely cannot see how such a great
outlay of capital can get its proper return.

Forster promised to invest a portion of your money
securely either in Germany or in Paraguay; but, if



196 SELECTED LETTERS OF

I know my sister well, this last portion will certainly
find its way before long into the pockets of those
numerous paupers. 1 I confess that they are my one
bugbear; remember that if anything goes wrong they
constitute a most unpleasant element with which to
deal. Then they always believe that one has unjustly
led them into trouble; whereas success and failure
often depend on accidents. To tell you the truth, my
dear Lama, your letters do not comfort me in the
least. If we were situated as you are we should all
write such contented and hopeful letters home par
ticularly to relatives. I have not written to you about
it yet; but I am not edified by the whole affair. In
my mind s eye, I can see these paupers, dependent
upon your pity, pressing themselves covetously upon
you in order to exploit your all too ready liberality.
No colony can prosper with such elements ; do not de
ceive yourself on that point. If they were peasants
it would be quite a different thing.

Also please allow me to question whether you are
so well fitted for colonizing as my brother-in-law so
often affirms. Not long ago I was talking to one of
jour former friends and he declared that we did not
even know what colonizing meant. It was an inces
sant struggle with the elements . . . and you
were as well fitted for it as "lily and rose-branches
would be for sweeping a chimney." A fine simile!
but very sad for the Lama. Forgive this sad letter,
but mother s anxiety on your account has infected me
also. I believe she is feeling ill as the result of bad



Amongst the so-called colonists there were numbers of peo
ple who had lost everything. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 197

German weather; but the Lama in the atmosphere
and the sun of the South holds her head up.

With love and solicitude,

YOUR BROTHER.



NIETZSCHE TO MALVIDA VON MEYSENBUG.

[May 12, 1887]

Address: Chur (Schweiz) Rosenhtigel

Until June 10
afterwards : Celerina, Oberengadine.

DEAREST FRAULEIN :

How strange it is! With regard to what you so
kindly said to me at the last moment, I wonder
whether it might not prove both refreshing and fruit
ful for us both once more to join our two solitudes
in closest and heartiest proximity! I have frequently
thought about this of late, and asked myself searching
questions about it. To spend one more winter with
you and to be looked after and waited upon perhaps
by Trina 1 herself that is indeed an extremely allur
ing prospect for which I cannot thank you suffi
ciently! I should prefer above all to return to Sor
rento once more (5ig xal TQig to xodov say the
Greeks: "all good things twice or thrice!") Or to
Capri where I shall play the piano to you again
but better than I did before ! Or to Amalfl or Castel-
lamare. Finally even to Rome (although my sus-

l The chambermaid of Frl. v. Meysenbug. Translator.



198 SELECTED LETTERS OF

picion of the Roman climate and of large towns in
general is based on good reasons and is not to be over
thrown so easily ) . Solitude in the midst of solitary
nature has hitherto been my chief refreshment, my
means of recovery; such cities of modern traffic as
Nice or even Zurich (which I have just left) in the
end always make me feel irritable, sad, uncertain,
desperate, unproductive, and ill. I have retained a
sort of longing and superstition with regard to that
peaceful sojourn down there, as if there I had
breathed more deeply, if only for a few moments, than
anywhere else in my life. For instance, on the occa
sion of that very first drive we took together in Naples
when we went to Posilippo.

Taking everything into consideration, you are the
only person on earth about whom I could cherish such
a wish; besides, I feel that I am condemned to my
solitude and my citadel. There is no longer any al
ternative. That which bids me live, my exceptional
and weighty task, bids me also keep out of the way of
men and no longer attach myself to anyone. Perhaps
it is the pure element in which this task has placed
me that explains why it is that I have gradually
grown unable even to bear the smell of men and least
of all "young men," with whom I am not infrequently
afflicted ( oh, how obtrusively clumsy they are, just
like puppies!) In the old days, in our solitude in
Sorrento, B. and R. were too much for me; I fancy
that at that time I was very reticent with you
even about things of which there is no one I should
have spoken to more readily than yourself.

On my table there lies the new edition (in two vol-.



PKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 199

umes) of "Human-all- too-Human," the first part of
which I worked out then how strange ! Strange that
it should have been in your respected neighbourhood.
In the long "address" which I found a necessary pre
face for the new edition of my complete works there
are a number of curious things about myself which
are quite uncompromising in their honesty. By this
means I shall hold "the many" once and for all at
arm s length; for nothing annoys men more than to
show them some of the severity and hardness with
which, under the discipline of one s own ideal, one
deals and has dealt out to oneself. That is why I have
cast my line out for "the few," and this after all I did
without impatience, for it is in the nature of the
indescribable strangeness and dangerousness of my
thoughts that ears should not be opened for them
until very late certainly not before 1901.

You ask me to come to Versailles oh, if only it
were possible ! For I esteem the circle of men that you
meet there (a curious admission for a German, but
in present-day Europe I feel related only to the most
intellectual among the French and Russians, and in
no way whatever to my countrymen who judge all
things on the principle of "Germany, Germany above
all"). But I must return to the cold air of the
Engadine; spring attacks me unconsciously; I dare
not tell you into what abysses of despair I sink un
der its influence. My body (and my philosophy, too,
for that matter), feels the cold to be its appointed
preservative element that sounds paradoxical and
negative, but it is the most thoroughly demonstrated
fact of my life.



200 SELECTED LETTERS OF

This is by no means a sign of a "cold nature":
but you, of course, understand that, my most dear and
faithful friend!

Always your affectionate and grateful friend,

NIETZSCHE.

P. S. Friiulein Salome has also informed me of her
engagement, but I did not answer her either, however
much happiness and prosperity I may honestly wish
her. One must keep out of the way of the kind of
creature who does not understand aw r e and respect.



To ROHDE.

Chur, May 21, 1887.

No, my old friend Rohde, I allow no one to speak
so disrespectfully of Monsieur Taine as you do in
your letter and you least of all, because it is con
trary to all decency to treat any man in the way you
do, when you know I think highly of him. If you
choose to do so you may, if you like, talk nonsense
about me to your heart s content that lies in the
natura rerum 1 ; I have never complained about it or
ever expected anything else. But in regard to a
scholar like Taine w r ho is more akin to your own
species, you ought to have eyes in your head. To
call him "jejune" is, to return to our student s jargon,
simply frantically stupid for he happens to be the
most substantial thinker in present-day France; and
in this connection it would not be inopportune to re
mark that where a man can detect no substance it



"The nature of things. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 201

does not necessarily follow there is none, but simply
that there is none for him. In the harrowing history
of the modern soul, which is in many respects a tragic
history, Taine takes his place as a well-constituted
and venerable type possessing many of the noblest
qualities of this soul its reckless courage, its abso
lutely sincere intellectual conscience, its stirring and
modest stoicism amid acute privations and isolation.
With such qualities a thinker deserves respect; he
belongs to the few who immortalize their age. I enjoy
the sight of such a brave pessimist who does his duty
patiently and resolutely without any need of noise or
stage effect aye, and who can honestly say of him
self : "satis sunt mihi pauci, satis est unus, satis est
nullus". 1 In this way, whether he wishes it or no, his
life becomes a mission, his attitude to all his problems
is an inevitable one (and not the optional or acciden
tal one that your own and most philologists are to
philology).

No offence, I hope. But if I knew you only by
this one remark of yours about Taine I believe that,
owing to the lack of instinct and tact it reveals, I
should thoroughly despise you. Fortunately, how
ever, as far as I am concerned, you have proved your
self a man in other ways.

But you really ought to hear Burckhardt speak
about Taine.

Your friend,

N.

a "A few are sufficient for me; one is sufficient, and even
none." Seneca Epist. Morales, 7-11. Translator.



202 SELECTED LETTERS OF

TO ROHDE.

Chur, May 23, 1887.
DEAR FRIEND:

It was not nice of me to have yielded suddenly as I
did yesterday to a fit of anger against you, but it is at
least a good thing that it has all come out, for it has
brought me something valuable in the form of your
letter. This has relieved me immensely and given a
different direction to my feelings against you.

Your remark about Taine seemed to me extrava
gantly contemptuous and ironical, and the part of me
that revolted against it was the anchorite. For this
part in me knows from an all too rich experience with
what unrelenting coldness all those who live off the
beaten track are dismissed and even dispatched. In
addition to this, with the exception of Burckhardt,
Taine is the only man who for many a long year has
sent me a word of encouragement and sympathy about
my writings. For the moment I even think of him and
Burckhardt as my only readers. As three fundamen
tal nihilists we are indeed irrevocably bound one to
another, although, as you may perhaps suspect, I
have not yet abandoned all hope of finding a way out
of the abyss by means of which we can arrive at
"something."

When a man keeps digging deep down in his own
mine, he becomes "subterranean" or perhaps sus
picious. It spoils his character hence my last let
ter. Take me as I am.

Yours,

N.


Huge rejoicing over the newly published, revised,
and amplified dressing gown ! Oh, but how ashamed
you make me feel ! For every day I felt the need of
this article of clothing, especially in view of the win
try weather we have been having this autumn, which
is intensified by the northerly situation of my room
which looks out on to the garden and is on the ground
floor. Nevertheless, I did not dare to have my dress
ing-gown sent here, because I remembered its dilapi
dated condition much more out of keeping with Nice
perhaps than with your more philosophical Venice.
And I am not yet modest enough to show my pride
by exhibiting my rags ! Ecco ! . . . . And now
suddenly to sit so much embellished and so eminently
respectable, in one s own room what a surprise!

Everything seems to conspire to make this winter
more acceptable to me than previous winters have
been. For during previous winters I have been driven
off my head not only from time to time, but con
stantly, habitually (and into Heaven knows what
possibly into the damnable writing of books and lit
erature). I have just been to inspect the room that
I shall occupy for the next six months ; it is just over
the one I have had up till now, and yesterday it was
freshly papered in accordance with my bad taste
a reddish brown with stripes and speckles. Opposite
to it at a sufficient distance away stands a building



204 SELECTED LETTERS OF

painted dark yellow, and above that, to exhilarate me
even more, half the sky ( which is blue, blue, blue!)
Below me lies a beautiful garden which is always
green and which I can survey as I sit at my table.
The floor of the room is covered with straw ; upon the
straw lies an old carpet, and over that a beautiful
new one. There are besides, a large round table, a
well-upholstered settee, a book-case, the bed, covered
with a dark blue counterpane, heavy brown curtains
over the door, and one or two other things covered
with bright red cloth (the wash-hand-stand and the
coat-rack) in short a nice multi-coloured mixture,
but on the whole warm and subdued. A stove is com
ing from Naumburg, of the kind I have described to
you. . . .

Even my brother-in-law has been good enough to
write to me; we both do our utmost to mitigate the
somewhat strained relationship ( he writes about
"Beyond Good and Evil", w T hich he had had sent out
to him; I did not send it to him for very special rea
sons). . . .

Your devoted and grateful friend,

NIETZSCHE.



I seem to feel as if I still had to make amends to
you for something that happened last Spring. And to
show you how perfectly willing I am to do all I can,
I send you herewith a copy of a work I have just



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 205

published (but, perhaps, I owe you this book any
how, because it belongs inseparably to the one I sent
last ). NO, do not let yourself be estranged from
me too easily ! At my age, and lonely as I am, I do
not feel any too eager to lose the few men who had
my confidence in the past.

Yours,

N.

N. B. About Monsieur Taine, let me beg you to
recover your senses. The coarse things you say and
think about him annoy me extremely. I would for
give such behavior on the part of Prince Napoleon 1
but not on the part of my friend Rohde. It would be
difficult for me to believe that the man who misunder
stands such severe and magnanimous spirits as Taine
(who is the educator of all the serious scientific char
acter in France today) could understand anything
about my own mission. Honestly, you have never
breathed a word to me that might lead me to sup
pose that you kneiv anything of the destiny that hangs
over me. But have I ever reproached you for this?
Not once, even in my own heart, if only for the sim
ple reason that I am not accustomed to any different
treatment from anyone. Who has ever approached
me with even a thousandth part of my passion and my
suffering! Has anyone even an inkling of the real
cause of my prolonged ill health over which I may
even yet prevail? I am now forty-three and am just
as much alone now as I was as a child.



Joseph Charles Paul Napoleon, Prince, who in his book
"Napol&m et ses detracteurs* (1887), also attacked Taine.-
Translator.



I am enjoying a great blessing this morning: for
the first time a "fire-idol" stands in my room : a small
stove and I confess that I have already pranced
round it once or twice like a good heathen. Until to
day my life has been a blue-fingered frosty affair, on
the basis of which not even my philosophy stood firmly
on its legs. Things are pretty insufferable when in
one s own room one can feel the frigid breath of
death when one withdraws to one s room not as to a
fastness, so to speak, but as if one were drawn back to
prison. For the last ten days it has been simply pour
ing: the rainfall per square metre has been reckoned
at 208 litres. This October was the coldest I have
ever had here, and this November the rainiest. Nice is
still rather empty and yet twenty-five of us sit down
to dinner every evening all of them kindly and well-
meaning people, to whom no objection can be made



. . . The fact that Rousseau was one of the first
followers of Gluck gives me cause for reflection; for,
as far as I at least am concerned, everything the
former prized is a little suspicious, as are also all
those who prized him (there is a whole family of
Rousseau Schiller belongs to it, and so in part does
Kant; in France, George Sand, and also Sainte-
Beuve; in England, George Eliot, etc., etc.). All
those who have been in need of "moral dignity" faute
de mieux have been among the admirers of Rousseau,



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 207

even down to our darling Diihring, who had the good
taste to represent himself in his autobiography as
the Rousseau of the 19th century. (Just observe how
a man stands towards Voltaire and Rousseau: it
makes all the difference in the world whether he says
yea to the former or to the latter : Voltaire s enemies
as, for instance, Victor Hugo, all romanticists, even
the subtler latter-day sort such as the brothers Gon-
court are all favourably disposed to that masked
plebeian Rousseau. And I suspect that there is some
thing of the resentment of the mob to be found at the
bottom of all Romanticism.) Voltaire is magnifi
cently intellectual canaille; but I agree with Galiani
that

"Un monstre gai vaut mieux
qu un sentimental ennuyeux."

Voltaire was only possible and tolerable on the soil
of a noble culture that can allow itself the luxury of
intellectual canaillerie.

Observe with what warm feelings, what tolerance,
my stove has already begun to permeate me !

I beseech you, dear friend, to be constantly mindful
of this one duty ; you cannot avoid it : you must once
more by word and deed elevate severer principles to a
place of honour in rebus muxicis et musicantibus,
and seduce the Germans to the paradox, which is a
paradox only at the present day : that the severer prin
ciples and more cheerful music are inseparable.

Your devoted and grateful friend,

N.

DEAR FRIEND :

. . . On all sides the chasm has become too
great, and I have to have recourse to every possible
kind of chastening influence in order not to descend
among the men of resentment myself. The sort of
defensive attitude towards me taken up by all those
people who were once my friends has something an
noying about it which is much more mortifying than
an attack. "Not to hear and not to see" that seems
to be the motto. No one made any response to the
Hymn, except Brahms, and he wrote : " J. B. begs to
present his sincerest thanks to you for what you have
sent him, as also for the honour which he esteems it
to be, and the great stimulus he derived from it. With
his most respectful compliments, etc."

Only two letters came about the book; but they at
least were very fine. One was from Dr. Fuchs, and
the other from Dr. George Brandes (the most in
tellectual Dane of the day that is to say, a Jew).
The latter seems inclined to take me up pretty thor
oughly; he marvels at the "original spirit" that is
exhaled by my works, and sums up their teaching in
the term "aristocratic radicalism." That is well said
and well conceived. Oh these Jews ! A few criticisms
of my "Beyond Good and Evil," sent me by Nauman,
show only ill-will : the words "ripe for the psychiater
and pathologist" are meant to explain and censure my
work at the same time. (Between ourselves, the un-



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 209

dertaking I have in hand is so huge and so monstrous
that I cannot take it amiss if people on reading my
books should at times feel some doubt as to whether
I am quite "sane.") . . .

. . . I am industrious but melancholy, and I
have not yet recovered from the state of vehement
irritation into which the last few years have thrown
me. I am not yet "sufficiently impersonalized."
Nevertheless, I know what has been done, and done
away with : all my previous life has been ruled off at
this point that has been the meaning of the last few
years. True, my existence hitherto has thus shown
itself to be what it actually is a mere promise. The
passion of my last work has something terrible about
it. Yesterday I read it with the most profound aston
ishment as though it were something new.

Write to me, dear friend, and let me hear nothing
but good news.

Your devoted,

N.

To KARL Fuces.

Nice (France), December 14, 1887.

Pension de Geneve.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

It was a happy thought on your part to write me
such a letter. For almost involuntarily and in pur
suance of an inexorable necessity, I am just in the
midst of calculating how I stand with men and things,
and laying the whole of my past ad acta. Almost
everything I am now doing amounts to an underlining



210 SELECTED LETTERS OF

of what has gone before. During the last few years
the vehemence of my inner vibrations has been ter
rific ; and now that I must ascend to a new and higher
form, what I most of all need is a new estrangement,
a still higher form of impersonalization. At the
same time it is essential for me to know what and
whom I can still regard as mine.

How old am I already? I do not know, any more
than I know how young I shall yet be.

I look at your portrait with pleasure. It seems full
of youth and courage, mingled, as is only becoming,
with incipient wisdom (and white hair?).

In Germany they are crying out aloud against my
eccentricities. But, as they do not know where my
centrum is, it is not easy for them to hit the nail on
the head in their efforts to determine where and
when I have been "eccentric" in the past. For instance
in being a philologist I was out of my centrum (for
tunately this does not by any means signify that I was
a bad philologist). On the same principle, it now
seems to me an eccentricity that I should ever have
been a Wagnerite. It was an extremely dangerous
experiment, and now that I know I have not been
ruined by it I also realize what it has meant for
me it was the severest test of character I could have
had. It is certain that one s inmost nature gradually
disciplines one s whole being into unity ; that passion
for which for ages one can find no name saves us
from all digressions and dispersions, that mission
whose involuntary custodian we are.

It is very difficult to understand such things from
afar. And that is why the last ten years of my life



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 211

have been extremely painful and violent. In the event
of your being inclined to hear anything more about
this ungodly and problematic history, let me recom
mend to your friendly sympathy the new editions of
my earlier works, particularly their introductions.
(Incidentally, let me tell you that my publisher, the
excellent E. W. Fritzsch of Leipzig, who has good
reason for feeling desperate, is prepared to send copies
of these new editions to anyone who promises to write
a long article about "Nietzsche en bloc." The more
important literary journals, such as Lindau s North
and South are ripe for such an article, as a genuine
feeling of anxiety and excitement is beginning to pre
vail concerning the importance of my literature. Up
to the present no one has had the courage and in-
intelligence to reveal me to the dear Germans. My
problems are new, the range of my psychological hor
izon is terrific, my language is bold and German.
Possibly there are no books in the German language
richer in ideas or more independent than mine.)

The hymn also belongs to this "underlining proc
ess." Could you not get someone to sing it to you?
I have already been promised its production in many
quarters (for instance, Mottl in Karlsruhe). It is
really intended to be sung "to my memory" one day.
It will survive as a souvenir of me, provided, of course,
that I survive.

Do not forget me, dear doctor. I thank you from
the bottom of my heart for wishing to remain my
friend even in the second half of your century.

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.



212 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.

Nice, January 25. 1888.
MY DEAR OLD LAMA :

It was with great pleasure that I read my brother-
in-law s pa?an on his "incomparable wife." I am
proud of having brought you up only very few women
would have overcome those extraordinary difficulties
with such bravery and unassuming cheerfulness. But
please let us have a little less modesty ! Do not forget
that the herd insists on having picturesque people
that is to say, people who draw pictures of their gifts,
aspirations, and successes in such bold and obtrusive
strokes that they can be grasped even by the dullest
eyes. The herd honours everything in the nature of a
pose, any solemn attitude, things from which we two
are averse. Only subtle spirits understand the shame
of the noble mind, that conceals its highest and its
best beneath a plain surface. I feel certain that
among all those people over there, only a few have
any idea with what little regard for yourself and
with what passionate resolution you try to realize
your ideals. The only question I ask myself is are
these ideals worthy of so much self-sacrifice? I very
much fear you will yet have to overcome many bitter
disappointments in your life. Ultimately you will be
come a sceptical old woman without having lost
your bravery; and you will be well suited to your
sceptical brother. How we shall laugh then over the
idealism of our youth possibly with tears.

Now let me tell you a little experience I have had.
As I was taking my usual walk yesterday, I suddenly



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 213

heard some one talking and laughing heartily along a
side path (it sounded almost as if it might have been
you) ; and when this some one appeared before me, it
turned out to be a charming brown-eyed girl, whose
soft gaze, as she surveyed me, reminded me of a roe.
Then, lonely philosopher though I am, my heart grew
quite warm I thought of your marriage schemes,
and for the whole of the rest of the walk I could not
help thinking of the charming young girl. Certainly
it would do me good to have something so graceful
about me but would it do her good? Would my
views not make her unhappy, and would it not break
my heart (provided that I loved her) to make such a
delightful creature suffer? No, let us not speak of
marrying !

But what you were thinking of was rather a good
comrade [...]. Do you really think that an
emancipated woman of this sort, with all her femi
ninity vanished, could be a good comrade, or could
be tolerable as a wife at all? You forget that, in
spite of my bad eyesight, I have a very highly devel
oped sense of beauty ; and this, quite apart from the
fact that such embittered women are repugnant to
me and spoil my spirits and my whole atmosphere.
Much intellect in a woman amounts to very little as
far as I am concerned, for this so-called intellect, by
which only the most superficial men are deceived, is
nothing more than the most absurd pretentiousness.
There is nothing more tiring than such an intellectual
goose, who does not even know how tedious she is.
Think of Frau O. ! But in this respect I must admit
that Fraulein X. is incomparably more pleasant but,



214 SELECTED LETTERS OF

nevertheless! You think that love would change her;
but I do not believe in any such change through
"love." Besides, you have not seen her for many
years it is obvious that she must have changed in
the direction of ugliness and loss of womanliness.
Believe me, if you were to see her now at her very
appearance the thought of love and marriage would
strike you, as it does me, as absurd. You can take
my word for it, that for men like me, a marriage after
the type of Goethe s would be the best of all that
is to say, a marriage with a good housekeeper! But
even this idea is repellent to me. A young and cheer
ful daughter to whom I would be an object of rev
erence would be much more to the point. The best of
all, however, would be to have my good old Lama
again. For a philosopher, a sister is an excellent
philanthropic institution, particularly when she is
bright, brave, and loving (no old vinegar flask like
G. Keller s 1 sister), but as a rule one only recognizes
such truths when it is too late.

Well, this has been a nice chat on marriage with
the Lama. With many hearty wishes and greetings
to you and your Bernhard, your



NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.
DEAR FRIEND : Mce &gt; February 1, 1888.

How close you have been to me all this time ! What
a tremendous deal I have thought out both trash and
wisdom with you always as the principal figure in



This refers apparently to the great Swiss novelist Gott
fried Keller. Translator.



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 215

my mind ! There has been a fine opportunity : the last
drawing in the Nice Lottery. For at least half an
hour I allowed myself the small and foolish luxury of
taking it for granted that I should win the first prize.
With half a million it would be possible to reinstate a
number of reasonable things on earth. At least you
and I would regard the irrational character of our
existence with more irony, with more detachment
for, in order to do the things you and I do, and to do
them quite well and divinely, one thing is fundamen
tally necessary, Irony (well, then, for this is the way
the world reasons half a million is the first prem
ise of irony. . . . ) .

To lack not only health, but also money, recogni
tion, love, and protection and not to become a tragic
grumbler: this constitutes the paradoxical character
of our present condition, its problem. As for myself,
I have got into a state of chronic vulnerability,
against which, when my condition is slightly im
proved, I take a sort of revenge which is not of the
nicest description that is to say, I adopt an atti
tude of excessive hardness. For a proof of this, look
at my last work ! Still, I put up with all this with the
sagacity of an old psychologist and without the small
est moral indignation. Oh, how instructive it is to live
in such an extreme state as mine ! Only now do I un
derstand history ; never has my vision been more pro
found than during the last few months.

Dear friend, your physiological computation about
the influence of Venice is perfectly right. In this
place, where one is constantly hearing so many visi
tors and invalids discuss the idiosyncrasies of the ef-



216 SELECTED LETTERS OF

fects of particular climates, I have gradually learned
to grasp the cardinal truth of this question. In regard
to the optimum, the realization of our most intimate
wishes (our "works"), one must hearken to tMs voice
of Nature; certain kinds of music can flourish no bet
ter under a wet sky than can certain plants. The lady
who is my neighbour at table has just told me that
until two weeks ago she had been lying ill in Berlin,
that she had caused the doctors there a great deal of
anxiety, and that she was unable to walk from one
corner of the street to the other. Now and she can
not account for the change in her she runs, she eats,
she is cheerful and can no longer believe that she
has been ill. As the same thing has happened to her
three times in her life, she now swears by a "dry cli
mate" as a recipe for all spiritual ailments ( for she
had suffered from a sort of desperate melancholia).
The fact that for years you should have found the
effect of the climate of Venice (as a contrast to the
climate in which you were brought up) very good for
you and a sort of balm oil that calmed you down, is
quite correct : I have discussed this vital question with
doctors in the Engadine : namely, that a climate when
tried as a contrast for its stimulating effect that is to
say when it is ordered only for a given period of time
has exactly the opposite effect when it is lived in
for good; and that the inhabitant of the Engadine,
under the constant influence of this particular cli
mate, becomes serious, phlegmatic, and a little
anaemic, w T hile the visitor to this part of the world
leaves it feeling braced and strengthened in all his
bodily functions. Moral: You ought, therefore, to



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 217

be (or have been) only a visitor to Venice. I am real
ly sorry to have to say this and even to see it in the
way I do ; for so much there is arranged and ordered
in such a splendid and suitable way for you that you
could not find the same anywhere else. You might
try Corsica? I have been told that one can find board
and lodging in the small hotels at Bastia for three
to four francs a day. So many fugitives from all
lands have lived in Corsica (particularly Italian
scholars, etc. ) . The railway line from Bastia to Corte
has just been opened (February 1, 1888). The great
frugality of the Corsican mode of life and the sim
plicity of their customs would make people like our
selves feel quite at home there. And how far away
from modernity one would feel there! Maybe the
soul would grow stronger, purer, and prouder there
. . . ( I can see quite clearly now that one would
suffer less if one were prouder: you and I are not
proud enough. . . .).

Your affectionate and devoted friend,

It has not been a "proud silence" that has sealed
my lips to everyone all this time, but rather the hum
ble silence of a sufferer who was ashamed of betray
ing the extent of his pain. When an animal is ill it
crawls into its cave so does la bete philosophe. So
seldom does a friendly voice come my way. I am now



218 SELECTEDLETTERS OP

alone, absurdly alone, and in mj unrelenting sub
terranean war against all that mankind has hitherto
honoured and loved ( my formula for this is "the
Transvaluation of all Values") I myself seem unwit
tingly to have become something of a cave, something
concealed that can no longer be found even when it is
a definite object of search. But no one goes in search
of it. Between us three, it is not beyond the limits
of possibility that I am the leading philosopher of the
age aye, maybe a little more than that, something
decisive and fateful that stands between two epochs.
But a man is constantly paying for holding such an
isolated position by an isolation which becomes every
day more complete, more icy, and more cutting. And
look at our dear Germans! . . . Although I am
in my forty-fifth year and have published about fifteen
books ( among them that non plus ultra "Zara-
athustra") no one in Germany has yet succeeded in
producing even a moderately good review of a single
one of my works. They are now getting out of the
difficulty with such words as "eccentric," "patholog
ical," "psychiatric." There have been evil and slan
derous hints enough about me, and in the papers both
scholarly and unscholarly, the prevailing attitude is
one of ungoverned animosity; but how is it that no
one protests against this? How is it that no one feels
insulted when I am abused? And all these years no
comfort, no drop of human sympathy, not a breath
of love.

In these circumstances one has to live at Nice. This
season it is again full of idlers, grecs and other phi
losophers it is full of my like. And, with his own



FRIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 219

peculiar cynicism, God allows his sun to shine more
brightly on us than on the more respectable Europe of
Herr von Bismarck ( which with feverish virtue is
working at its armaments, and looks for all the world
like a heroic hedgehog) . The days seem to dawn here
with unblushing beauty; never have we had a more
beautiful winter. How I should like to send you some
of the colouring of Nice ! It is all besprinkled with a
glittering silver grey ; intellectual, highly intellectual
colouring ; free from every vestige of the brutal ground
tone. The advantage of this small stretch of coast
between Alassio and Nice is the suggestion of Africa
in the colouring, the vegetation, and the dryness of the
air. This is not to be found in other parts of Europe.
Oh, how gladly would I not sit with you and your
dear wife beneath some Homeric Phseacien sky ! But
I must not go further south ( my eyes will soon drive
me to more northern and more stupid landscapes).
Please let me know when you will be in Munich again
and forgive this gloomy letter.

Your devoted friend, NlETZSCHE .

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Nice, Pension de Geneve,
DEAR FRIEND: February 26, 1888.

The weather is sultry, it is Sunday afternoon, and I
am very lonely. I can think of nothing more pleasant
to do than to sit down and have a chat with you. I
have just noticed that my fingers are blue, so my writ
ing will be legible only to him who can guess my
thoughts. . . .



220 SELECTED LETTERS OF

What you say in your letter about Wagner s style
reminds me of an effusion of my own on the subject
that I wrote somewhere, in which I say that his "dra
matic style" is nothing more than a species of bad
style, or rather, no style in music. But our musicians
call this progress. ... As a matter of fact, in
this domain of truth, everything still remains to be
said aye! I very much suspect that everything still
remains to be thought. Wagner himself, as a man, an
animal, a god, and an artist rises a thousand miles
above the understanding and the lack of understand
ing of our Germans. Whether it is the same with the
French I do not know.

To-day I had the pleasure of being proved in the
right over a question, which, in itself, might seem
extraordinarily daring: to wit what man up to the
present has been the best prepared for Wagner?
Which of us was most adapted to Wagner and most
Wagnerian inwardly in spite of and without Wagner?
To this question I had for some considerable time
replied by pointing to that odd three-quarter imbecile
of a Baudelaire, the poet of Les Fleurs du Mai. I
had deplored the fact that, during his lifetime, this
man was so fundamentally related to Wagner in
spirit ; I had marked the lines in his poems that were
in any way redolent of Wagner s sensibility, to which
no form has been given in the poetry of any other man
(Baudelaire is a libertine, mystic, and satanic to
boot ; but above all Wagnerian ) . And what do I find
to-day? On turning over the leaves of the recently
published (Euvres Posthumes of this author so highly
esteemed and even beloved in France, lo and behold,



FEIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 221

in the midst of invaluable Psychologicis of decadence
(mon coeur mis a nu, after the manner of those intro
spective writings of Schopenhauer and Byron 1 that
were burnt) what should I find but a hitherto unpub
lished letter of Wagner s relating to one of Bau
delaire s essays in the Revue Europeenne, April, 1861.
Here is a copy of it :

"My dear Monsieur Baudelaire, I have called upon
you several times without finding you in. You will
readily understand how anxious I am to tell you what
a tremendous pleasure you gave me by your article
that does me so much honour and gives me more en
couragement than anything anyone else has said as
yet about my poor talent. Would it not be possible
for me before long to tell you in person how elated I
felt at reading those beautiful pages that described
to me after the manner of the finest poem the im
pression I may boast of having made upon a mind so
superior as yours? Thank you a thousand times for
the kindness you have shown me, and, believe me, I
am proud to be able to think of you as a friend. May
we soon meet ! Yours,

Richard Wagner."



222 SELECTED LETTERS OF

[Wagner was then forty-eight years old and Bau
delaire was forty. The letter is touching, although it
is in such wretchedly bad French.]

In the same book there are a few sketches by Bau
delaire in which in a most passionate manner he de
fends Heinrich Heine against French criticism ( Jules
Janin). During the latter part of his life, when he
was half mad and slowly declining, Wagner s music
used to be played to him as a form of medicine: and
even when Wagner s name was mentioned to him, "he
smiled with joy". 1

(If I am not mistaken, Wagner only wrote one
other letter expressive of such gratitude and enthu
siasm, and that was after the receipt of The Birth of
Tragedy.)

(Extract from one of Baudelaire s letters: "I
dare not write any more about Wagner : people have
made too much fun of me. This music has been one
of the greatest joys of my life : for full fifteen years
I have not experienced such feelings of elation, or
rather ecstasy 2 ").

How are you now, dear friend? I have vowed to
take nothing seriously for a while. Even you are not
to believe that I have once again written "literature" :
this essay was for myself. Every winter now I in
tend to write just such an essay for myself, the
thought of getting it published is practically out of
the question. . . . The Fritzsch has been settled
by wire. Spitteler has written. It is not a bad letter.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 223

and in it he apologises for his "impudence" (his own
word). 1

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Nice, March 21, 1888.
Pension de Geneve, Rue Rossini.
DEAR FRIEND:

. . . With regard to all the things you wrote to
me on the last occasion in puncto Wagner, I was abso
lutely delighted. You are the only man to-day who is
able not only to feel such finesses of taste but also to
substantiate them. Whereas I, on the other hand, am
condemned to groping and feeling my way in my usual
absurd manner. I no longer know anything, hear any
thing, or read anything; and in spite of it all there
is really nothing about which I am more concerned
than the fate of music.

I must not forget, however, that I have, as a mat
ter of fact, heard three things by Offenbach (La
Pericholle, La Grande Duchesse de Gerolstein, La



Spitteler had published a review of Nietzsche s works in
the "Bund" of Berne for the end of January, 1888. It was on
the whole well meant, thought in regard to many points it re
vealed misunderstandings. Nietzsche was pleased with the re
view as such, although he did not conceal from the editor of
the Bund the objections he had to it. When Spitteler heard of
this, he laid the points in question before Nietzsche himself.
.Originally Spitteler s essay dealt only with Nietzsche s earlier
writings; when, however, Spitteler became acquainted with the
other works he asked the editor of the Bund to return his re
view which he then extended. This occurred a third time
before the essay was finally published in January, 1888. ("Be
yond Good and Evil" was never known to Spitteler, that is
why it is not mentioned in his review.) This kind of imperfect
acquaintance with and rapid discussion of an author s works
seemed to Spitteler, particularly in regard to Nietzsche, even
then a performance for which he felt he must apologize.



224 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Fille du Tambour Major) and was delighted. Four
or five times in each work he attains to a height of the
most wanton buffoonery, but always absolutely log
ically in the form of classical taste and all the while
he remains ever wonderfully Parisian! ... In
addition, this favoured son of the gods has had the
luck to get the cleverest of Frenchmen to write his
librettos: Hale&gt;y (who only a little while ago was
made a member of the Academy as a reward for that
stroke of genius La Belle Helene), Meilhac, and
others. Offenbach s texts have something bewitching
about them, and constitute perhaps the only instance
of opera having operated in favour of poetry. . . .

I must tell you of another remark of Seydlitz s, who,
a few days ago, wrote to me from Egypt and will, on
his return journey, possibly pay me a visit, together
with his wife, his mother, his dogs, and his attend
ants. Complaining of the Khamsin which is blowing
there, he says : "It is like a brown symphony trans
posed into meteorological terms it is ruthless, sandy,
dry, incomprehensible, nerve-racking in fact a sort
of sirocco ten times over."

I have succeeded in doing something that will make
you laugh : quite unsolicited, but with full knowledge
that no one else would do anything for him, 1 I have
procured a publisher for a thick volume of ^Esthetica
by Spitteler. The firm is that of Veit and Co. (Her
mann Credner of Leipzig, an "amateur" of my litera
ture).



Spitteler has since then become a European celebrity.
He received the Nobel prize for 1921. Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 225

I receive letters from Copenhagen frequently.
They are always very intelligent, but constantly full
of the signs of a life of suffering. Brandes is so thick
in the fight, and so lonely, that he seems to be in need
of someone to whom he can open his heart. . . .

I have just been sent an intelligent and not unsym
pathetic notice of my "Genealogy of Morals," that has
appeared in the National Gazette. It came from the
reviewer himself, P. Michael is, assistant preacher at

the Cathedral of Bremen. "Nietzsche is rude, but

j&gt;

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.

To SEYDLITZ.

(Until June 5) Torino (Italia) ferma in posta.

May 13, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND:

It seems to me improbable that you should have
finally resigned yourself to be a mummy. Spring is
come and once again you will be open to the charms of
"the German Gemut" 1 and perhaps even to those of
friendship. Your letter came as a comforting draught
in the mid-winter of my discontent at Nice, of which, I
regret to say, I gave you a not very estimable sample.
With my departure from Nice, this time, my black
spirits have left me and, miracle upon miracle, up
to the present I have had a most cheerful spring, the
first for ten or fifteen years, perhaps longer! The
fact is, I have discovered Turin. . . . Turin is an

. *A sort of sentimental yearning. Translator.



226 SELECTED LETTERS OF

unknown city, is it not? The "cultured" German goes
past it. I, in my deliberate callousness to all the de
mands of culture, have decided to make Turin my
third place of residence, with Sils-Maria as the first
and Nice as the second. Four months at each place:
two months of spring and two of autumn in Turin.
Strange! My reason for this decision is the air, the
dry air, which is the same at all three places, and
for the same meteorological reasons. Snow-capped
mountains to the North and West ! Reckoning on this
principle I came here, and am delighted. Even on very
warm days and we have had many that famous
Zephyr blows of which I had heard hitherto only from
the poets (without believing them race of liars!).
The nights are cool. One can see the snow from the
very centre of the town. Besides which there are ex
cellent theatres, Italian and French. Carmen was
played, of course, in honour of my presence (successo
piramidale excuse the allusion to Egypt!). An
earnest, almost high-minded world of quiet streets
lined with 18th century palaces very aristocratic!
( I live opposite the Palazzo Carignano, an old palace
belonging to the Ministry of Justice.) The height of
open-air cafes, of ice-cream, of cioccolato Torinese! 1
There are polyglot bookshops, a university, a good
library, and the city is the headquarters of the General
Staff. It is intersected by beautiful avenues, and on
the banks of the Po there are incomparably beauti
ful landscapes. It is by far the most pleasant, the
cleanest, and the roomiest city in Italy, with the

J The famous chocolate of Turin. Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 227

luxury of the portici 1 extending over a length of
10,020 metres. North winds, so it seems, bring me
cheerfulness, and just fancy, north winds reach me
even from Denmark. Incidentally, this is the latest
news Dr. George Brandes is now delivering an im
portant course of lectures at the University of Copen
hagen, on the German philosopher Friedrich Niet
zsche! According to the papers these lectures are
having the most brilliant success. The hall is full to
overflowing each time ; more than three hundred peo
ple present.

I wonder how long it will take before my peripheral
influences ( for I have adherents in North America
and even in Italy) will react upon the beloved Father
land? where with crafty seriousness I have been al
lowed to go my way without so much as a protest being
raised against me. . . . That is very philosophical
and shrewd!

By-the-bye, let me ask you a question. Has my pub
lisher sent you my last essay, the Polemic, in proper
style, "for your esteemed perusal"?

Yesterday I thought out a picture, which, to borrow
a phrase from Diderot, was of a moralite larmoyante.
A winter landscape and in the middle an old coach
man who, with a cynical expression on his face harder
than the surrounding winter, is relieving nature
against his horse s legs. The horse, a poor oppressed
creature, turns round to look, and is grateful, very
grateful. . . .



The famous colonnades that line the principal streets in
Turin. Translator.



228 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Good-bye, dear friend ! Remember me to your dear
wife ( there is good news from my sister who has
now moved into the colony of Nueva Germania) and
if possible also to your mother.
With hearty good wishes,

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, Thursday [May 31, 1888].
DEAR FRIEND:

. . . Dr. Brandes lectures have come to a suc
cessful conclusion. The lecturer himself was given a
great ovation ; which, however, he maintains was not
intended for him. He assured me that my name is now
popular in all intelligent circles in Copenhagen and
that it is known everywhere in Scandinavia. It would
seem that my problems interested these northerners
very much indeed. In one or two details they were
better prepared for them than the rest of the world;
for instance, they were ready for my theory of "mas
ter morality" owing to the thorough general knowl
edge they possess of the Icelandic sagas which provide
very rich material for the theory. I am glad to hear
that the Danish philologists approve and accept my
derivation of bonus: in itself it seems rather a tall
order to trace the concept "good" back to the concept
"warrior". Without my hypothesis no philologist could
ever have lighted upon such a notion.

. . . I owe a good deal of solid instruction to
the last few weeks. I found the Law-Book of Manu
translated into French a work carried out in India



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 229

under the careful supervision of distinguished local
dignitaries of the Hindu religion, and scholars. This
absolutely Aryan product, a sacerdotal code of moral
ity built upon the foundations of the Vedas, the idea
of castes, and almost prehistoric in its antiquity and
not at all pessimistic although very sacerdotal com
pletes my ideas about religion in the most remark
able manner. I confess that the impression it has
given me is that everything else we possess in the
nature of great moral codes is simply an imitation or
even a caricature of this work : above all Egypticism.
Even Plato strikes me as being, in all important
points, merely the well-schooled chela of a Brahmana.
While from the standpoint of Manu s Law-Book, the
Jews seem to be a Chandala race, that has learned
from its masters, the principles according to which a
priesthood can prevail and organize a people. . . .
Even the Chinese appear to have brought forth their
Confucius and their Laotse under the influence of this
classically antique law-book. The organization of the
Middle Ages seems like a monstrous groping after the
recovery of all the ideas on which the primeval Indo-
Aryan community rested but in its case we have to
reckon with the additional bias of pessimistic values
that found their forcing dung in the general decadence
of races. Here, again, the Jews appear to have been
only "intermediaries" (middle-men) they invent
nothing.

So much, my dear friend, to show you how glad
I am to have a talk with you. On Tuesday I leave.
Your affectionate friend,

NIETZSCHE.



230 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Sils-Maria, June 20, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND:

Your "love duet" came like a flash of lightning to
brighten my gloom. I was cured at one stroke; I
confess that I even cried for joy. What memories this
heavenly music awakens in me! And yet only now
that I have read it for the sixth time in succession
do I seem to understand it fully it strikes me as
being in the highest degree suitable for singing. It is
full of lofty enthusiasm that would have delighted
Stendhal: only yesterday I was reading the richest
of his books "Rome, Naples and Florence," and it con
stantly reminded me of you. 1 Among other things,
he relates how he asked Rossini : "Which do you pre
fer, the Italiana in Algeri or the Tancredi?" Rossini
answered: "II matrimonio segreto." 2 . . .

And this, dear friend, reminds me that I must con
gratulate you on having kept the title The Lion of
Venice. It is certainly a very attractive title and
makes a strong appeal to the imagination. It would
be a pity if the suggestion of Venice were left out of it.
. . . I also like the description, "an Italian comic
opera" ; it will obviate many a confusion and misun
derstanding. Finally, you are right to abide by the
name "Peter Gast" : I realized this while reading it.
It is curt, naif, and if you don t mind my saying so,



Something quite unexpected has just been published:
Stendhal s Diary, his privatissime consisting of about 16 books,
which were discovered at Grenoble among a confused mass of
his papers. (Note by Nietzsche.)

3 Mozart was Stendhal s favourite musician. Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 231

German. ... You know that ever since last
autumn I have thought your opera music very Ger
man old-German of the good old sixteenth century.
Once more my very best thanks the sudden ap
pearance of this magnificent duet really was a cure.

I was moved by the death of the Emperor Fred
erick : after all he did represent a tiny flame of free
thought, the last hope for Germany. Now the era
of Stacker begins 1 I draw conclusions and know
already that my "Will to Power" will be suppressed
first in Germany. . . .

With heartiest greetings and much gratitude,

Your friend,

NIETZSCHE.

To KNORTZ.

Sils-Maria, Oberengadine,
June 21, 1888,
Switzerland.
DEAR SIR:

The arrival of two works from your pen, for which
I thank you, leads me to suppose that you are now in
possession of my literature. The task of giving you
a picture of myself either as a thinker or as a writer
and poet strikes me as being extraordinarily difficult.
The first important attempt of this sort was made
last winter by the distinguished Dane, Dr. George



*Adolf Stacker was a Court ecclesiastic with a strong bias
against the Jews. By "era of Stacker" Nietzsche probably
means era of Antisemitism and narrow-mindedness.



232 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Brandes, whom you will know as a historian of lit
erature. This gentleman delivered a long course of
lectures at the University of Copenhagen under the
title of "The German Philosopher, Friedrich Niet
zsche," the success of which, from all accounts, seems
to have been brilliant. He managed to provoke the
lively interest of an audience of 300 people in the
boldness of my problems, and, as he himself says,
has made niy name popular throughout the north.
Otherwise my audience and my admirers are more
concealed. Among the French section of them I
reckon Monsieur Taine. My firm conviction is that
iny problems, the whole position I assume as an Im-
moralist, is much too premature for the present age,
which is by no means prepared for it. I have not the
remotest desire to go in for propaganda and have not
yet moved a finger in that direction.

I believe my Zarathustra is about the deepest book
in the German tongue, and the most perfect from
the standpoint of language. But in order to realize
this, whole generations will be needed who will first
of all have to overtake the inner experience upon
which the foundation of such a work could grow. I
would almost feel inclined to advise you to begin
with my last most far-reaching and most important
works ("Beyond Good and Evil" and "The Genealogy
of Morals"). For my own part, the books I prefer
are those belonging to my middle period "The Dawn
of Day" and "The Joyful Wisdom" (they are the most
personal).

The "Thoughts Out of Season," which is the work
of youth in a certain sense, is of the greatest value



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 233

from the standpoint of my spiritual development. In
Volker, Zeiten und Menschen, by Karl Hillebrand,
you will find a few excellent essays on the first of the
"Thoughts Out of Season." The essay against Strauss
provoked a tremendous storm ; the essay on Schopen
hauer, the perusal of which I particularly recommend,
shows how an energetic and instinctively yea-saying
spirit knows how to derive the most beneficent im
pulses even from a Pessimist. For some years, which
belong to the most precious of my life, I was bound to
Wagner and Frau Cosima Wagner by feelings of the
deepest confidence and most cordial friendship. If
at the present day I belong to the opponents of the
Wagnerian movement, it is obvious that no personal
motives have induced me to assume this position. In
Wagner s Collected Works, Vol. IX (if I remember
rightly), there is a letter addressed to me which bears
testimony to our relationship. I would fain believe
that, thanks to their wealth of psychological experi
ences, their fearlessness in the face of the most dan
gerous things, and their lofty candour, my books are
works of the highest rank. Moreover, in the art of
exposition and in the matter of aesthetic quality, I
would brook comparison with anybody. I am bound
to the German language by long years of affection,
secret intimacy and profound reverence. This is a
sufficient explanation of why I can no longer read any
books written in that language.
I am, dear sir.

Yours very truly,

PROFESSOR DR. NIETZSCHE.



234 SELECTED LETTERS OF

To KARL FUCHS.

Sils-Maria, Oberengadine, Switzerland.

June 30, 1888.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

How strange ! How strange ! As soon as I was able
to transfer myself to a cooler clime ( for in Turin the
thermometer stood at 31 day after day) I intended
to write you a nice letter of thanks. A pious inten
tion, wasn t it? But who could have guessed that I
was not only going back to a cooler clime, but into the
most ghastly weather, weather that threatened to
shatter my health ! Winter and summer in senseless
alternation; twenty-six avalanches in the thaw; and
now we have just had eight days of rain with the sky
almost always grey this is enough to account for my
profound nervous exhaustion, together with the re
turn of my old ailments. I don t think I can ever
remember having had worse weather, and this in my
Sils-Maria, whither I always fly in order to escape bad
weather. Is it to be wondered at that even the parson
here is acquiring the habit of swearing? From time
to time in conversation his speech halts, and then he
always swallows a curse. A few days ago, just as he
was coming out of the snow-covered church, he
thrashed his dog and exclaimed: "The confounded
cur spoiled the whole of my sermon !" . . .

Yours in gratitude and devotion,

NIETZSCHE.



FBIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 235

NIETZSCHE TO His MOTHER.

Sils, July 23, 1888.

MY DEAR MOTHER :

I have yet to discuss the curious money affair with
you. 1 Yesterday evening your letter reached me, just
after I had heard of this, and yesterday morning I had
already sent off a letter to Professor Deussen. For
he had announced the matter to me direct, in very
much the same way as he had announced it to you,
but in his letter to me there was an extra sentence
which I repeat for your edification : "I hope you will
be kind and understanding enough to allow a few of
us to repair the sins that mankind have committed
against you." In my answer I protested against the
suggestion that mankind had sinned against me ; paid
a tribute to the liberality and undeserved gratitude
of the Bale people ; denied most emphatically that my
case was a pressing one and, finally, exactly on the
same lines as you yourself had thought of, I accepted
the- money, simply and only in view of the impossibil
ity of finding publishers, and the necessity of having
my works printed at my own expense. (During the
last four years, I have spent over 4,000 marks in print
ing expenses.) The greater part of the money con
stituting this presentation is probably all Deussen s
( last autumn he made me the most pressing offers
of the same kind) . I do not altogether credit the story



Note by E.F.N.: "Professor Deussen had just sent my
brother 2,000 marks in the name of a few admirers who wished
to remain anonymous, to help him with the printing of his
books."



236 SELECTED LETTERS OF

of the "anonymous" Berlin admirers: the only man
who could have had a share in the matter, and whose
character would be in keeping with it, would be Dr.
Ree (who is on good terms with Deussen). All this
between ourselves. The most important thing of all
is that no one should hear about it. It would be very
bad for me, particularly in Bale, if anybody got the
slightest wind of the affair. For at Bale they are
really doing more than they undertook to do (my
pension ought really to have come to an end in
1886!). This winter I shall not go to Nice, for, last
time, the visitors in the hotel became interested in the
distressing state of my finances in a way that wounded
my pride. Do not write about this business- to Para
guay; Lizzie would certainly not regard it as a gift
of honour, but as "alms," just as I do. I very much
prefer to bestow gifts upon my admirers and this
autumn I shall require about 200 marks for printing
expenses. It is also possible that for my travels this
winter I may be in need of a little extra cash, as
I want to try something new. For many reasons, I
am in need of a journey that will change my mind and
divert me generally; for I have been extraordinarily
depressed and melancholy of late. Otherwise, you
know how economical I am. Give the money to
Ktirbitz, therefore ; but impress upon him that I shall
require some of it very soon.

Your old thing,

F.


. . . The company at this hotel is not bad ; and
all the distinguished members of it try to be intro
duced to me. Among these are, a very agreeable law
yer, Dr. Schon, from Ltibeck; an old President of
Northern Germany ; a Professor von Holten of Ham
burg, here for the second time; a conductor from the
Court Theatre of Dresden; and even the pretty girls
pay me court quite openly. People are beginning to
think of me as "somebody." This year the cook is
cooking for me with special "finesse." Letters come
which are in part mad with enthusiasm for my books :
among these there was one that was sent off in the
middle of Parsifal at Bayreuth, in the name of a
whole coterie of "disciples" from Vienna. Never
theless, I am very cool in the face of such adolescent
advances. I do not write for men who are ferment
ing and immature.

Fraulein von Salis has come, too ; she is even a little
thinner and paler than she was before. This week Sils
has had her three new bells swung, and to-day I con
gratulated their excellent founder and maker the
leading bell-founder in Switzerland. Their sound is
very fine.

. . . With greetings and a hearty embrace,

Your Old Thing.



238 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO His MOTHER.

Sils, August 30, 1888.
MY DEAR MOTHER :

It is my wish that this letter should reach you on
September 2 at the* latest, not to celebrate the anni
versary of Sedan, but because on that day your ex
cellent Alwine 1 will have been with you ten years. In
these days, when everything is constantly on* the
move, this period is almost a miracle; and there are
few things for which you could be more envied (un
less it were for your son ) . It is precisely because
you are alone, with your two children at the opposite
ends of the world, that you really require such a good
and faithful creature with you, in order to feel at
home at all. The worst of it is, that you will not so
easily find a substitute if ever one should become
necessary. Please tell Alwine for me how much I
thank her and appreciate her services : I believe that
everything good in this world has its reward.

. . . With heartiest greetings,

Your Old Thing.

. . . The first letter about the Case [of Wagner]
came from Gersdorff. He also says of the Lion-duet
(ex ungue I eon em 2 ) "this is the sort of music I like.
Where are the ears to hear it and the musicians to



The servant with Nietzsche s mother. Translator.
a "From the claw judge the lion," i. e., from the part judge
the whole. Translator.



FRIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 239

play it?" Now listen to a strange thing Gersdorff
has told me about which I am highly delighted:
Gersdorff saw Wagner in a transport of rage against
Bizet, when Minnie Hauck was in Naples and sang
Carmen. In view of the fact that Wagner has taken
sides in the matter, too, my malice in a certain impor
tant passage [of the pamphlet] will be felt all the
more keenly. Moreover, Gersdorff sends me a serious
warning against the female Wagnerites. The title of
my new book, "The Twilight of the Idols," will also
be felt in this sense that is to say, as another malevo
lent thrust at Wagner. . . .

. . . Five paces away lies the largest Piazza,
with the old mediaeval castle. On the Piazza there
stands a charming little theatre, in which in the even
ing one can sit in the open, eat one s gelato, and now,
best of all, listen to the French Mascottc by Audran
(which I got to know very well at Nice) . This music,
which is never vulgar and so full of pretty ingenious
little melodies, exactly fits the sort of idyllic existence
which I now need of an evening. ( Its opposite is the
Gypsy Baron by Strauss. 1 I very soon fled from this
with loathing it is characteristic of the two kinds
of German vulgarity, the bestial and the sentimental
kind, in addition to containing perfectly appalling
attempts at posing as an accomplished musician.
Heavens ! how superior the French are to us in taste. )

With best greetings, dear friend, and heartiest
wishes for Berlin and all that depends thereon,

Yours,

N.

Vohann Strauss "Der Zigeuner Baron."



240 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO MALVIDA VON MEYSENBUG.

Turin, October 4, 1888.
MY DEAREST FRIEND :

I have just given nay publisher the order to send
you at once at your Versailles address three copies
of an essay of mine that has just been printed, the
title of which is "The Case of Wagner, A Musician s
Problem." This work, a declaration of w r ar, in
acstheticis, and one which could not be more radical
in conception, seems to be making a great stir. My
publisher informs me that as soon as it was announced
that an essay by me on this problem and written in
this spirit was going to be produced, so many orders
came in that the edition might be regarded as ex
hausted. You will see that I have not lost my good
spirits in this duel. Truth to tell, in the midst of the
appallingly severe task of my life, the annihilation of
Wagner is a veritable recreation. I wrote this little
essay here in Turin in the spring: meanwhile I have
completed the first book of my "Transvaluation of All
Values."

This essay against Wagner ought to be read in
French. It would even be easier to translate it into
French than into German. In many respects it is in
intimate harmony with French taste: my praise of
Bizet at the beginning would be listened to with great
interest. It is true that the translation would require
a fine, if not a subtle stylist, in order to render the
tone of the essay adequately : after all, I myself am
now the only subtle writer in German.

I should be most grateful if you could obtain the



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 241

invaluable counsel of M. Gabriel Monod 1 on this point.
( The whole of the summer I had the opportunity of
getting advice from another quarter, from M. Paul
Bourget, who was staying in my immediate neigh
borhood; but he understands nothing about rebus
musicis et musicantibus; but for this, he would be
the translator I should like to have.)

This essay, well translated into French, would be
read by half the world. I am the only authority on
this matter and moreover enough of a psychologist
and a musician not to be imposed upon by anything
in all matters of technique.

I read your kind letter, dearest friend, with deep
emotion. You are absolutely right so am I. 2

With all the heartiest wishes of your old friend,

N.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, Thursday, October 30, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND :

. . . The weather is so perfect that to do a thing
well is no feat. On my birthday I again started some
thing fresh something that promises to be a success

"Then Professor of History at the Sorbonne. Translator.

a Nietzsche here refers to a letter written to him by Fraulein
von Meysenbug on August 12, 1888, in which the following
passage occurs: "When you complain that the gifts you lavish
on the world evoke no response, no answer, let me assure you
that more than one heart beats in affectionate sympathy with
you and your lot, and that it is chiefly your own fault if your
experience is such an unhappy one, for he who surrenders
himself to solitude/ you know well enough what happens to
him. It is either a mistake or a paradox to say that you have
the luck to embitter everything weak and virtuous against*
you. The truly virtuous are not at all weak; on the contrary,



242 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and is already well advanced. It is called Ecce Homo,
or Hoiv one becomes what one is. It is a daring
treatise about myself and my writings: in it I wish
not only to represent myself as confronted by the
weird and solitary task of the Transvaluation I
should also like for once to discover what I actually
risk under cover of the German idea of the Freedom
of the Press. What I suspect is that the first book
of the Transvaluation will be suppressed on the spot
legally and with the best of all possible rights.
With this Ecce Homo I should like to drive the ques
tion to such a pitch of earnestness and curiosity that
the customary and, at bottom, rational ideas as to
what is allowable, should make an exception in this
case. Moreover, I speak about myself with all possible
psychological subtlety and good cheer I should hate
to come before my fellow men in the guise of a
prophet, a monster, and a moral-scarecrow. In this
sense, too, this book might do some goad: it may
perhaps prevent my being confounded with my
opposite.



they are the truly strong: as the original concept virtu actually

? roves. And you yourself are the living proof of the contrary;
or you are truly virtuous, and I believe that your example, if
men only knew it, would convince them more than your books.
For what constitutes the quality of being virtuous? It means
that for the sake of a great idea, an ideal, one is prepared to
endure life steadfastly with all its miseries, and to rescue it
from the thraldom of blind will, by means of knowledge and the
freedom of self-determination. You have done and in another
form accomplished what the saints of an earlier faith used to
achieve. The fact that the people in Germany are now on their
knees before the idol of Might, is of course sad enough; but the
time will come when even German intellect will awake anew
from its slumber. And if not? Well, then, the further develop
ment of mankind will be carried on by other stocks, as we see
happening in Denmark and America. - Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 243



I am all agog about your Kunstwart-bumamty. 1
Do you know, by-the-bye, that in the summer I wrote
Herr Avenarius an extremely rude letter because of
the way in which his paper dropped Heinrich Heine.
Rude letters in my case a sign of good cheer.

With heartiest greetings and best wishes for the
past, the present and the future. ("One thing is more
necessary than another" Thus Spake Zarathustra) .

N.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.
Torino (Italia) via Carlo Alberto. 6. III.

End of October, 1888.
MY DEAR LAMA :

. . . As you see I am again in my good city of
Turin, the city of which Gobineau 2 also was so fond
may be it is like us both. I, too, very much enjoy the



" Kunstwart" (arbiter of art) is the name of a German art
journal. At the end of November, 1888, Cast s review of
Nietzsche s "The Case of Wagner" appeared in this journal.
Translator.



244 SELECTED LETTERS OF

distinguished and somewhat haughty manner of these
old Turinians. There is no greater contrast than that
between good-natured but thoroughly vulgar Leipzig
and this city of Turin. Moreover, we have a curious
similarity of taste in all important matters I mean
the Turinians and myself not only does it extend to
the style of the houses, and the arrangement of the
streets, but also to the cooking. Everything here
tastes good, and everything suits me admirably; so
much so that my strength has increased here to an
astonishing degree. It is really hard luck that I did
not discover this place ten years ago. All too late I
desperately bewail the fact that I did not spend that
summer of most terrible memory here instead of at
that most appalling of all places the Engadine! It
is a good thing that I managed to steal away from
there in time: now it would be scarcely possible to
get to Italy from that direction, for the heavy floods
in Italy, Switzerland and France still continue. Com
pared with the summer elsewhere it has of course been
cool here in Turin; but that would be no objection
against it, because a cool summer in Turin amounts,
as far as I am concerned, to a very agreeable moderate
temperature. As a matter of fact everybody here is
well satisfied with the year: and I have not heard
this said anywhere else in Europe. At the time when
we were having dreadful weather in the Engadine
here they were celebrating the great festivals in con
nection with Prince Amadeo s wedding with Laetitia,
the daughter of Jerome Napoleon.

This time, as I am no longer a stranger here, things
have very much improved for me, so that there is now



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 245

a real contrast between my wretched and deplorable
existence in Nice and my life in Turin. Everywhere
people treat me with the utmost deference. You ought
to see how pleased they all look when I come, and
how everybody in every rank of life does his best, exer
cises his tact to the utmost, and displays his most
courteous and most amiable manners. But this is not
only the case here; year in, year out, it is the same
wherever I am. I except Germany there alone, have
I had the most hateful experiences [. . . ]. When,
hereafter, my history is written, people will read
therein : "He was treated badly only by Germans !"
Heavens, what extraordinary people these Germans
are! and how tedious! Not a single intelligent word
ever comes to me from that direction.

In this golden autumn the first I have ever had
my whole life long I am writing a sort of retrospect
of my life, 1 for myself alone. No one shall read it,
save a certain good Lama, when she comes across the
ocean to visit her brother. It is not the stuff for the
German cattle whose culture is making such astonish
ing strides in the beloved Fatherland. I shall bury
and conceal the manuscript ; it may mould away, and
when we have all turned to ashes it will celebrate its
resurrection. Perhaps at that time the Germans will
be more worthy of the great gift I think of giving
them.

With my heartiest embrace,

YOUR BROTHER ANIMAL,
Who is now quite a great beast.

*Ecce Homo. Translator.



246 SELECTED LETTERS OF


. . . My "Ecce Homo, How One Becomes What
One Is," came into being between October 15, my
birthday and my precious King s day, and November
4, and it was produced with so much of the self-
glorification of antiquity and such good spirits that
it seems to me too worthy an object to be joked about.
The last parts, by-the-bye, are conceived in harmonics
which appear to be absent from the Meistersinger,
"the manner of the world-ruler" . . . The last
chapter bears the disagreeable title: "Why I am a
Fatality." The fact that this is so is proved so con
clusively that in the end people are forced to halt in
front of me, as before a "spectre" and a "feeling
breast." 1

The manuscript in question has already performed
the crab-march to the printers. As to the form of the
production, I have selected the same as that decided
upon for the "Transvaluation," to which it is a fire-
spitting introduction.

Herr Carl Spitteler has vented his delight over
"The Case of Wagner" in the Bund of Berne. He
finds extraordinarily apt expressions. In the letter
he also congratulated me on having followed up my
thoughts to their extremest consequences. He seems
to regard my general indictment of modern music
as the music of decadence, as a contribution of the

From Schiller s "Taucher," Verse 21. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 247

highest value to the history of civilization. Inciden
tally he had first applied to the Kunstwart.

I hear from Paris that I may expect an article in
the Revue Nouvelle. I was also approached by a fresh
sympathizer from St. Petersburg: Princess Anna
Dmitrivna Tnicheff . A day or two ago I also re
ceived the address of Bizet s charming widow, whom I
am especially requested to please by sending a copy of
my Wagner pamphlet.

Our wonderful little ladies of the Turin aristocracy
have planned a Concorso di bellezza, for January;
they have grown quite wanton since the portraits of
the Spa beauty-prize winners reached here. As early
as the spring I noticed a similar contest in the matter
of portraits at the last exhibition. Wherein they no
doubt feel superior to the whole world outside Turin
in the perfect naivete with which they entrust their
bosoms to the painter.

Our new citoyenne, the beautiful Latitia Bonaparte,
recently married to the Duke of Aosta, and now a
resident here, will in any case be one of the com
pany. . . .

Your friend,

NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, November 18, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND:

Your letter has led to consequences. I feel some
thing in the nature of an electric shock. . . .
Without a moment s delay a little note was despatched
to Fritzsch of which the last line read: "In sincere



248 SELECTED LETTERS OF

contempt Nietzsche." In two days time I shall
write to him and say, "Let us come to terms, Herr
Fritzsch. In these circumstances it is not possible
for me to leave my work in your hands. How much
do you want for the whole lot?" If things can be so
arranged that all my works are restored to me and
transferred to Naumann it would be a masterly stroke
at the present juncture two years later Herr Fritzsch
might want to consider the matter very seriously.
. . . Mille grazie! It may be that you have proved
yourself to be the founder of my fortune. I reckon
that he will ask for 450 ; if I am not utterly at fault
he paid Schmeitzner 300. Think of it! I shall be
come the owner of "Zarathustra !" "Ecce Homo"
alone will open people s eyes. I am almost falling off
my chair with joy.

But all this is merely incidental. I am deeply con
cerned about a very different question the question
of light opera to which your letter refers. We have
not seen each other since the time I received so much
enlightenment on this question oh, so much enlight
enment! So long as you confound the idea of light
opera with anything in which there is condescension
or vulgarity of taste, you are excuse the drastic ex
pression only a German! . . . Just enquire
how Monsieur Audran defines light opera : "the Para
dise of all delicate and refined things," sublime sweet-
stuffs included. Only a little while ago I heard a per
formance of Mascotte three hours and not a bar of
Vienneseness (= swinishness) .* Just read any one of



The German play on the words "Wienerei" and "Schwein-
erei" cannot be rendered in English. Translator.



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 249

the French notices about a Parisian Operette; in
France of the present day they are real geniuses in
the art of intellectual wantonness, malicious good
nature, archaisms, exoticisms, and absolutely ingenu
ous things. For a light opera to be able to succeed
amid the enormous pressure of competition it must
contain ten numbers of the very first quality. There
is already quite a science of finesses in taste and in
effect. I assure you Vienna is a pigsty. If I could
show you a real Parisian soubrette who creates in
one single part, as for instance Mile. Judie or Milly
Meyer the scales would fall from your eyes, or rather
I should say from light opera. Light opera has no
scales; these are merely German ....

And here I think is a sort of recipe. For such bodies
and souls as we possess, dear friend, a little poison
ing with Parisin is simply salvation we become our
selves, we cease from being case-hardened Germans.
Forgive me, but I could not even write German until I
had imagined Parisians as my readers. "The Case of
Wagner" is Light-opera music.

Only lately I made the same remark about a really
genial work by the Swede Herr August Strindberg,
who was introduced to me by Doctor Brandes, one of
his chief admirers. It is French culture based upon
an incomparably stronger and healthier foundation;
the effect is bewitching. It is called Les Maries ( Par
is, 1885). Strange to say, we absolutely agree about
"woman" Dr. Brandes had already noticed this.

Moral : not Italy, old friend ! Here where I can see
the leading light opera company in Italy, I say to
myself, at the sight of each movement of the pretty,



250 SELECTED LETTERS OF

all-too-pretty little women, that they make a living
caricature of every light opera. They have no esprit
in their little legs not to speak of their little heads.
. . . . Offenbach is just as sombre ( I mean thor
oughly vulgar) in Italy as in Leipzig.

See how wise I am becoming now! How I trans
value even the values of my friend Gast! Why not
Brussels . . . Best of all of course, Paris itself.
It is the air that does it. . . . Wagner knew that;
he only learnt how to stage himself in Paris. Begging
you to take this letter tragically,

EVER YOURS, N.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, Monday, November 26, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND :

Perhaps you have also received a copy of the "Twi
light of the Idols"? The first copies reached me here
yesterday. I have fixed the price of the book at one
and a half marks; you understand? "Ecce Homo,"
which will be put in hand now, will be the same price
and have the same binding and everything. Deliver
me from a difficulty and give Naumann something
about the "Twilight of the Idols" for the Bookseller s
trade paper. You can express yourself as strongly as
you like.

Fritzsch wants about 10,000 marks from me.

The question of the "Freedom of the Press", as I
see it only too clearly now, is one which cannot be alto
gether raised in respect of my "Ecce Homo." I have
taken a stand so very far beyond not that which is
to-day generally accepted and supreme, but beyond



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 251

mankind that to apply a law-code to my work would
be a farce. Besides, the book is full of jokes and
malicious conceits, because I present myself with vio
lent emphasis as the opposite of that type of man who
has been looked up to hitherto the book is as "un
holy" as it can possibly be.

I admit that "The Twilight of the Idols" strikes
me as being perfect. It is impossible to say such
decisive things more plainly or more delicately. No
man could have employed ten days more usefully;
for the book certainly took no longer. Jacob Burck-
hardt had the first copy from me.

For some time past we have been having the most
delightful spring-like weather, which still continues,
At present I am sitting quite happily and quite light
ly clad before an open window.

One last consideration. Understand, my dear
friend, that to "disturb circles" 1 is really impossible
in my present way of living. There is something par
ticular about these circles something different; 2 at
times I find myself utterly upset at the impossibility
of saying a single honest or unequivocal word to any
one there is no one to whom I can say such things
except Herr Peter Gast. . . . And you will cer-

*A reference to Archimedes absorption in mathematical
problems when Syracuse had fallen into the hands of the
Romans. The story was that soldiers discovered him drawing
circles, and not knowing who he was, killed him.

*It seemed to Gast that to move to Turin close to Nietzsche s
side, with all the light opera work that he (Gast) then had on
hand, was, in view of Nietzsche, as also on his own account,
extremely imprudent. Writing to Nietzsche, Gast said: "You
would very soon have cried out to me noli turbare circulos meox.
Whereupon Nietzsche replied with the passage to which this
note refers in order to set Cast s mind at rest.



252 SELECTED LETTERS OF

tainly find in ray "actuality", which at bottom is
cheerful and full of malice, more inspiration for light
opera than anywhere else. I play so many silly tricks
with myself, and have such extraordinary clownish
notions in private, that occasionally I grin I know
of no other word upon the open street for half an
hour at a time. A day or two ago it occurred to me
to introduce Malvida as a laughing Kundry at a de
cisive point in "Ecce Homo." . . . For four days
I have lost the power of composing my features into
an expression of seriousness.

I think that in such a state a man is ripe for the
task of "World Redeemer"? . . .

Come!

YOUE FRIEND, N.

NIETZSCHE TO His SISTER.


I received your letter 1 and, after having read it
several times, see myself seriously compelled to wish
you good-bye. At the present moment when my fate
has decided itself, I feel every one of your words with
tenfold sharpness ; you do not seem to be even remotely
conscious of the fact that you are next-of-kin to the



Unfortunately I had received "The Case of Wagner" be
fore his two letters of September 14th and 17th had reached
me, and had written him a letter full of alarm and sorrow
about it, which had hurt his feelings. Then he feared the effect
of the Antichrist, for Christianity and Wagner had become our
most vulnerable points. (It should not be forgotten that as
a rule from ten to twelve weeks elapsed between the dispatch
of a letter from Paraguay and the receipt of an answer to it.)
Frau F.N.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 253

man and his destiny, in which the question of millen
niums has been decided speaking quite literally, I
hold the Future of mankind in my hand.

I know human nature and am unspeakably far
from condemning in any individual case, what, after
all, is nothing more than the fatality of mankind in
general ; nay more I understand how you, precisely,
finding it utterly impossible to see the things among
which I live, were almost forced to take refuge in
their opposite. The only thing that consoles me, is
the thought that in your way, you have done well,
that you have some one you love and who loves you,
that you have yet a great mission to fulfil, to which
you have consecrated your means as well as your
strength and, finally, I will not conceal the fact that
this very mission has led you so far away from me
that you do not even feel the coming shocks that are
perhaps about to shake me. In any case, I trust this is
so, for your sake, but above all I implore you urgently
never to allow yourself to be misled by any friendly
and in this case dangerous inquisitiveness, into
reading the books that I am about to publish now.
They would only wound you most terribly and
wound me into the bargain by the thought of you.
That is why I regret having sent you the essay on
Wagner, which, in the midst of the appalling tension
in which I live was a genuine relief to me, as an honest
duel between a psychologist and a pious seducer
whom it was difficult for anyone to recognize as such.

To set your mind at rest, let me say at least that I
am feeling wonderfully well, and more resolute and
patient than I have ever felt before in my whole life.



254 SELECTED LETTERS OP

The most difficult task comes easily to me, and every
thing I touch succeeds. The task that lies upon me
is after all my own nature and thus only now have
I some idea what the happiness was that was await
ing me all this time. I play with a burden that
would crush every other mortal. For that which I
have to accomplish is terrible, in every sense of the
word. I do not only challenge individuals I chal
lenge the world of mankind with a terrific indictment.
However the judgment may fall, for or against me,
my name is in any case linked up with a fatality the
magnitude of which is unutterable.

While begging you to read, not hardness, but its
reverse in this letter genuine humanity which is try
ing to avoid superfluous mischief I beseech you to
retain your love for me despite the necessity circum
stances have forced upon me.

YOUR BROTHER.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, December 2, 1888.

Sunday afternoon, after 4 o clock, and an extraor
dinarily fine autumn day. I have just returned from
a big concert which really produced upon me the
strongest impression I have ever experienced at a
concert in my whole life. My face was constantly dis
torted by my efforts to overcome my feelings of ex
treme pleasure, including ten minutes of the distor
tion of tears. Oh, what a pity you were not there!
At bottom it was the lesson of light opera applied to
music. The ninety leading musicians of the town;
an excellent conductor; the largest theatre in the



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 255

place, with glorious acoustic conditions; 2,500 peo
ple in the audience; without exception everything
here that has anything to do or to say in regard to
music. Truly a publico sceltissimo 1 nowhere else
hitherto have I had the feeling that so many nuances
were being understood. The programme consisted
only of extremely fine pieces, and I seek in vain for
an example of more intelligent enthusiasm. No
where an acknowledgment of mediocre taste. They
opened with the Egmont Overture believe me, I
thought only of Herr Peter Gast the whole time.
Then we had Schubert s Hungarian March, magni
ficently interpreted and orchestrated by Liszt. Im
mense success, da capo. Then something for all the
string instruments alone, at the end of the fourth
bar I was in tears. A perfectly heavenly and pro
found inspiration by whom? By a musician called
Kossaro who died in Turin in 1870. I swear to you
it was music of the very first quality, so excellent in
its form and sentiment that it altered my whole con
ception of the Italians. Not a moment s sentimen
tality I no longer know what "great" names are.
May be the best remain unknown. Then followed
the Overture to Sakuntalq, after which the conduc
tor had to acknowledge the uproarious applause eight
times. Ye Gods! this fellow Goldmark! I should
not have believed it of him. This overture is con
structed a thousand times better than anything of
Wagner s, and psychologically it is so seductive, so
subtle, that I once again breathed the air of Paris.

*A most select public. Translator.



L&gt;56 SELECTED LETTERS OF

Instrumentally planned out and thought out, like
filigree work. Then we had another piece for string
instruments alone: A Cyprian Song by Bilbao
again the last word in subtlety of invention and musi
cal effect; once more tremendous success, and da
capo, although it was a long piece. In conclusion:
Patrie! an Overture by Bizet. How cultured we are!
He was thirty-five years old when he wrote this long
dramatic work, and you ought to hear how the little
man grows heroic.

Ecco! Can one be better fed? And I only paid a
franc to get in!

To-night they are playing Francesco, da Rimini in
the Carignano; in my last letter I sent you an ac
count of it. The composer Cagnoni will be present.

It strikes me more and more that in its judgment
of music, as in other matters, Turin is the soundest
city I know.

YOUR FRIEND, N.

NIETZSCHE TO His MOTHER.
Torino, via Carlo Alberto. 6. III.
December 21, 1888.
MY DEAR OLD MOTHER :

. . . The weather is somewhat misty here too,
but not so bad as to make me light any fires yet.
After a few days of mist the sun and the clear sky
always recover the upper hand. There has been a
grand funeral here, that of one of our princes, a
cousin of the King; a very deserving man in Italy,
and also in the Navy, for he was Admiral of the
Fleet.



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 257

. . . The best news I have comes from my
friend Gast, whose whole experience has changed
wonderfully. Not only are the leading artists in
Berlin Joachim, de Alma, those most exacting and
spoilt of German artists most deeply interested in
his works, but what will surprise you most is that
he moves in the richest and most distinguished circles
in Berlin. Perhaps his opera will be produced for
the first time in Berlin. Count Hochberg is closely
connected with the circles frequented by Gast.

On the whole, your old thing is now a hugely
famous animal, not exactly in Germany, for the Ger
mans are too stupid and too vulgar for the loftiness
of my spirit, and have always put their foot in it
where I am concerned but I mean everywhere else.
My admirers consist of none but the most excep
tional natures, nothing but highly placed and influ
ential people in St. Petersburg, Paris, Stockholm,
Vienna, and New York. Oh if you only knew on
what terms the foremost personages of the w r orld
express their loyalty to me the most charming
women, a Madame la Princesse Tenicheff not by any
means excepted. I have genuine geniuses among my
admirers to-day there is no name that is treated
with as much distinction and respect as my own.
You see that is the feat sans name, sans rank, and
sans riches, I am nevertheless treated like a little
prince here, by everybody, even down to my fruit-
stall woman, who is never satisfied till she has picked
me out the sweetest bunch from among her grapes.
Fortunately I am equal to all that my task de
mands of me. My health is really excellent. The



258 SELECTED LETTERS OF

most difficult tasks for which no man has yet been
strong enough, come lightly to me.

My dear old mother, at the close of the year, I send
you my heartiest wishes, and ask you to wish me a
year which will in every respect be in keeping with
the great things that must happen in it.

YOUR OLD THING.

NIETZSCHE TO PETER GAST.

Turin, December 22, 1888.
DEAR FRIEND:

. . . Your news is excellent and the case of
Joachim is of the very first order. Without the Jews
there is no immortality they are not the "eternal
race" for nothing. Dr. Fuchs, too, knows his busi
ness very well indeed. I confess that so long as there
is a chance of Hochberg (for any minute a mad Wag-
nerite may step into his place), that chance should
be kept in view. . . .

. . . Strange! During the last month I have
learnt to understand my own writings nay more, to
value them. Joking apart, I had never known their
full import, I should lie were I to say except in the
case of Zarathustra that they had impressed me.
It is the case of the mother with her child she may
perhaps love it but she is stupidly ignorant of w r hat
the child is. Now I am absolutely convinced that
they are all successful productions from beginning
to end and that they one and all aim at the same
object. Yesterday I read the "Birth of Tragedy";
it is something indescribable, deep, subtle, and
happy. . . ,



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 259

We had better not print the pamphlet Nietzsche
contra Wagner. "Ecce" contains everything decisive
even on this point. The part which, among other
things, also refers to the maestro Pietro Gasti has
already been inserted in "Ecce." I may also add the
song of Zarathustra it is called "Concerning the
Poverty of the Richest," as a sort of interlude be
tween two important parts.

I have received a wonderfully nice letter -from
Monsieur Taine in Paris ( he also gets Peter Gast
to read!) ; he bemoans the fact that he does not un
derstand enough German for toutes mes audaces et
finesses that is to say, not enough to understand
them at first glance and as a competent reader of
my works he recommends no less a person than the
chief editor of the Journal des Debats and the Revue
des Deux Mondes, Monsieur Bourdeau, one- of the
leading, and most influential figures in France, and a
man who has made the most profound study of Ger
many and her literature.. He&gt; ought to undertake to
make me knowa in France and see to the question
of translation. Monsieur Taine has recommended
him for that purpose. Thus the great Panama Canal
to France has been opened.

My best wishes to your respected relatives,

Your friend,
NIETZSCHE.

DEAR SIR:

How glad I should be to be able to tell you once
more with, what admiration and gratitude I always
think of you. You gave me access to the most noble ar
tistic emotions of my life, and if I was unable to thank
you immediately after the two performances, please
ascribe this to the fact that I was in that utterly
shaken condition when a man neither speaks nor
thinks but can only creep into loneliness. All of us,
however, took leave of you and of Munich with feel
ings of the deepest personal obligation, and as I was
quite unable to express this to you more clearly and
eloquently, it occurred to me that I might prove my
desire of showing my gratitude by sending you one
of my own compositions, in the somewhat sorry but
necessary form of a dedication intra parietes. An
eminently worthy desire! But what unworthy mu
sic! Laugh at me I deserve it.

I see from the papers that you are going to per
form Tristan again on August 8. 2 I shall probably
come and see it again. My friend Gersdorff will
also be back in Munich in time for it.



*In view of the great fame of Burckhardt, Billow, Brandes
and Strindberg, it has been thought advisable to give the
answers of these correspondents as well. Editor.

This performance was postponed to August 18th owing
to the King s belated return from the hills.



262 SELECTED LETTERS OF

A day or two ago I had the pleasure of receiving a
letter from Herr von Senger. Have you read R.
W. s letter (pamphlet) on classical philology? My
fellow philologists are jolly exasperated about it. A
Berlin pamphlet entitled Zukunftaphilologie directed
against my book seems to be chiefly concerned with
the object of annihilating me. But I am also in
formed that a counter manifesto, written by Profes
sor Rohde in Kiel, which will soon be published,
is calculated to annihilate the pamphleteer in ques
tion. I, for my part, am busy with the conception
of a new essay; unfortunately it is also about Zu-
kunftsphilologie, and I can only wish every pamphle
teer a similar occupation. In the midst of this work
I should like once more to enjoy the recuperating
power of Tristan ; then I should return to the Greeks
rejuvenated and purified. But inasmuch as it is you
who dispense this magic medicine, you are my doc
tor, and if you should think that your patient writes
atrocious music, you know the Pythagorean art-
secret of curing him by means of "good" music. But
in this way you rescue him for philology, while he,
if left to himself without good music, would begin
to howl musically from time to time like the cats
on the tiles.

Assuring you, dear sir, of my friendship and de
votion,

I am yours, sincerely,

FRIEDEICH NIETZSCHE.



FK I ED RICH NIETZSCHE 263

HANS VON BtfLOW TO NIETZSCHE.

Munich, July 24, 1872.
MY DEAR PROFESSOR:

I was so taken aback by your kind letter and the
presentation accompanying it that I have rarely in
my life felt so thoroughly uneasy in similar circum
stances. The one question I asked myself was shall
I hold my tongue, or send a civil and trivial note in
reply or shall I open my heart quite freely? The
latter course required courage almost to the extent
of daring and to adopt it I had first to assume that
I could rely on your firm belief in the respect I feel
for you as a genial and creative champion of science
and secondly to take refuge in two privileges I
possess and to which I only refer with the greatest
reluctance one of them indeed melancholy enough
the fact that I am a score of years or so your sen
ior, and the other that I am a professional musician.
In the latter capacity I am accustomed like the com
mercial man who "in matters of business drops
friendship" to practise the precept; in materia mu-
sicce 1 politeness ceases.

But to turn to the matter in hand. Your Man
fred Meditation is the most extreme example of fan
tastic extravagance and the most unedifying and
most anti-musical composition I have met for some
time. Again and again I had to ask myself whether
the whole thing was not a joke and whether it had
not perhaps been your intention to write a parody
of the so-called Music of the Future. Was it not

a ln musical matters. Translator.



264 SELECTED LETTERS OF

on purpose that without exception you put every rule
of harmony to scorn from the higher syntax to the
most ordinary conventions of correct composition?
But for the psychological interest for despite all
their confusion, your feverish musical productions
display an exceptionally distinguished spirit your
Meditation, from the musical standpoint can only
be compared to a crime in the moral world. I was
utterly unable to find the faintest trace of any Apol
lonian elements in its composition, and as for those
of the Dionysian order, I must confess that your
piece reminded me more of the morrow of a Bac
chanalian festival than of the festival itself. If you
really feel a passionate call to express yourself in the
language of music it is essential that you should
master the first elements of that language. A reeling
imagination revelling in the memory of Wagnerian
chords is not a fit basis for creative work.

The most outlandish Wagnerian audacities, apart
from the fact that they spring quite naturally from
the dramatic texture and are justified by the words
(in purely instrumental passages, as every one
knows, it avoids such atrocities) are always correct
from the standpoint of language indeed they are so
down to the smallest detail of notation. If the in
sight of a thoroughly educated musical scholar like
Dr. Hanslick 1 is inadequate to this purpose, it fol
lows that to form any proper estimate of Wagner
as a musician, a man must be a musician and a half.
If, my dear Professor, you really meant this aber-



z Eduard Hanslick, the anti- Wagnerian critic of the Vien
nese "Freie Presse" Translator,



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 265

ration in the realm of composition seriously which
I cannot still help doubting do at least try to con
fine yourself to vocal music, and let the words of
the song steer you in the boat you sail on the wild
waters of music.

Once again, no offence I hope for you yourself
called your music "execrable", you are right; it is
even more execrable than you imagine. True it is
not generally harmful, but it is worse than that, it is
harmful to yourself and you could not possibly em
ploy any surplus leisure you may have more badly
than by torturing Euterpe in the way you do.

If you declare that I have overstepped the utter
most limits of the most elementary civility I shall not
attempt to deny it. Please discern in my uncom
promising frankness (rudeness) the proof of my
equally sincere respect. Really, after all I have
said, I cannot make this lame excuse. I simply could
not help giving full vent to my indignation at all
such anti-musical experiments in tone. Perhaps I
ought to direct a portion of this indignation against
myself, for, seeing that I am responsible for Tris
tan s having been performed once more, I am indi
rectly to blame for having plunged so lofty and en
lightened a mind as yours, my dear Professor, into
such regrettable pianoforte convulsions. 1

Perhaps, however, you will be cured by Lohengrin
on the 30th. I am sorry to say, however, that it wall
not be performed under my direction but under that



Frau Forster Nietzsche here makes the following note:
"This is a mistake. The composition had already been finished
in the spring of 1872."



266 SELECTED LETTERS OF

of the regular Court Conductor, Wiillner. I re
hearsed and studied it in the year 1867. The dates
for the Flying Dutchman and Tristan are not yet
settled. Some say the 3rd and 6th of August, others
the 5th and 10th. I am not in a position to give
you any official information on the matter, for until
Sunday everybody from His Excellency to the hum
blest of the singers will remain in the country to en
joy the holidays.

Once again I feel the same embarrassment as I
felt when I first took up my pen to write to you.
Please do not be too vexed with me, dear Sir, and
be so good as to think of me only as one who was genu
inely edified and instructed by your magnificent
book, which it is to be hoped will be followed by
many like it and who is therefore deeply and re
spectfully grateful to you.

H. VON BtfLOW.



Note by Frau Forster Nietzsche: With his pro
digious frankness Nietzsche made no attempt to con
ceal this letter from his friends. On August 2, 1872,
he sent it to Rohde, for instance, with the following
lines : "I have at last been given a real lesson in con
nection with the composition which I played to you
all at Bayreuth last Whitsuntide. The honesty of
Billow s letter makes it most invaluable to me. Read
it, laugh at me, and believe me when I say that it
puts me in such a holy terror of myself that since I
received it I have not been able to touch a piano."
As, however, even among musicians themselves voices
were raised accusing Btilow of a lack of profound



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 267

penetration (even Liszt thought Billow s judgment
was "very desperate" ) Nietzsche answered his friend
with his customary gentleness and impartiality as
follows :

NIETZSCHE TO HANS VON BULOW.

Bale, October 29, 1872.
DEAR SIR:

I have indeed allowed myself time, have 1 not,
thoroughly to digest the admonition in your last let
ter, and to thank you most heartily for it. Rest per
fectly assured that I should never have dared, even
for fun, to solicit your opinion of my "music" if I
had had the faintest suspicion of its total unworthi-
ness! Unfortunately up to the present no one has
shaken me out of my harmless conceit and out of the
fantastic notion that, however amateurish and
grotesque it might be, I was able to write what was
to myself at least thoroughly "natural" music. Now,
when I meditate on your letter, I realize, though
perhaps but vaguely, the unnatural dangers to which
I have exposed myself through this laisser aller.
Nevertheless I still cannot help believing that your
judgment would have been a trifle more favourable
only just a trifle more if I had played you that
piece of bad music in my own way, badly, but with
expression. Owing to lack of technical skill much of
it has probably been put on paper in so bandy-legged
a fashion as necessarily to offend a true musician s
sense of propriety and purity.

Just think that until now, from my earliest child
hood onwards, I have lived thus in the maddest of



268 SELECTED LETTERS OF

illusions, and have found so much delight in my mu
sic! So you can imagine the state of my "enlight
ened understanding" of which you seem to have such
a high opinion. The question as to whence this de
light arose continues to be a problem to me. It
seemed somewhat irrational, and though I could see
neither to the left nor the right of it, the delight re
mained. And in connection with this Manfred music
in particular I had such fierce, such defiantly pa
thetic sensations; it gave me the same joy as a piece
of diabolical irony. My other "music" is and this
I hope you will believe more human, softer and
purer.

The very title itself was ironical for I could not
help considering Byron s Manfred, which as a boy
was almost my favourite poem, as a madly formless
and monotonous monstrosity. Now, however, I shall
hold my peace about it and I assure you that since
your letter has taught me a lesson I shall do only
what is becoming in music. You have helped me
very much indeed this is an admission that still
causes me no little pain to make.

Do you think the enclosed pamphlet by Professor
Rohde would give you any pleasure? 1 The notion
"Wagnerian philologist" is surely new. As you see
there are two of them already.

Do not think ill of me, my dear sir, and do me the
favour of forgetting the anguish both as a man and
as a musician to which you were subjected by the com-



^ohde s address to Richard Wagner, written in reply to
Willamowitz Mollendorf s attack on Nietzsche s "Birth of
Tragedy" and entitled "Zukunftsphilologie,"



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 260

position I so thoughtlessly sent you, while, I for my
part, shall certainly never forget your letter and words
of good counsel. I say what children say when they
have done something foolish: "I will never do it
again," and remain, with the same feelings of regard
and respect for you, sir, as you knew me before,
Ever your devoted,

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



Note by Frau Forster Nietzsche: How far it lay
from Nietzsche to bear any grudge against Billow is
proved by his attitude as revealed in a letter written
about the following matter: The Allgemeine Deutsche
Musikverein (the National German Musical Society)
proposed to award a prize for the best essay on Wag
ner s Nibelungen poem, and they entrusted the direc
tion of the competition to Professor Carl Riedel, the
founder and leader of the Riedel Society in Leipzig,
who had been a student in Nietzsche s class at Bale.
Riedel at once applied to Nietzsche, asking him to be
one of the judges and to propose two more. Nietzsche
replied to this request as follows: "Let us use the
utmost severity and caution in the choice of the third
judge! If you would be so kind as to listen to a pro
posal I have to make, I would suggest Herr Hans von
Billow, of whose thoroughly sound judgment and crit
ical rigour I have the highest opinion based on the
most excellent experience. It is of the utmost import
ance that we should have a name that sounds well
and is at the same time stimulating and forbidding
and that name is Billow. Do you not agree with



270 SELECTED LET TEES OF

me?" The choice of Billow was not entertained only
because the competition for the Prize Essay was not
a musical but a purely literary one.

HANS VON BILLOW TO NIETZSCHE.

Baden-Baden, August 29, 1873.
MY DEAR PROFESSOR :

Pray accept my heartiest thanks for your continued
feelings of friendship for me, the most precious proof
of which has just reached me in the shape of your
excellent philippic against the Philistine David, 1
which I read and re-read to the end with real gau-
dium. (At the present moment the book is in the
hands of Dr. Ludwig Nohl 2 , who asked me to lend it
to him.)

Your characterization of the Philistine of Culture,
of the Maecenas of Culture without style, is a genu
inely manly deed of words, worthy of the author of
the "Birth of Tragedy." Ecr . . . Tint 8 . . .
would have to be the work of a modern Voltaire. The
aesthetic International is far more odious to people
like ourselves than that of the black or red bandits. 4

I am anxiously waiting for the second of the
"Thoughts Out of Season." I hope to greet you in
person in Switzerland during the course of October
and with renewed thanks and deepest respect.
I remain, Y our devoted,

HANS VON BtiLOW.

*David Strauss. Translator.




FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 271

HANS VON BULOW TO NIETZSCHE.
London, November 1, 1874.
27 Duke Street, Manchester Square.
MY DEAR PROFESSOR :

On my return from my first concert here from the
enclosed programme you will see that the preparation
for the surprise afforded me by your present was
quite "in keeping" I had the pleasure of receiving
your new book 1 which Professor Hillebrand very
kindly forwarded to me via Florence. Pray accept
my heartiest thanks for your kind recollection of my
old admiration for the author of the "Birth of Trag
edy" and my assurance that I will read your essay on
Schopenhauer, which seems to me "so subjective" a
conception, through to the end with all the attention
you deserve. I even read as far as Sec. 5 last night. If
only I might see in the freshness of this new production
of yours a refutation of the rumours that have lately
reached me about the alarming state of health of its
author. So the "matrigna" 2 nature a coinage of
Leopardi s is not blind every day, but imparts en
durance and firmness of purpose to those who have
to fulfil the duties of higher educators. If only things
could have gone with you as they did with me last
summer, when after having been forced to go in for a
spell of complete "relaxation" in order to recover
from three months of the most wretched marasmus,
to my great astonishment I found that with the help
of a moderate course of hydrotherapy I was once more

J The third of the "Thoughts Out of Season." Translator.
Stepmother. Translator.



272 SELECTED LETTERS OF

in the active possession of all the accessories necessary
for the struggle for existence.

"Public opinion - - private indolence" 1 brilliant!
This is another of those household words which, like
the "Philistine of Culture", is sure to enjoy a wide
popularity even in the environment of that gentleman
himself. Bismarck ought to quote it in Parliament!

Would you allow me to tell you of an idea I have
long cherished which found its way above my own
clearly unsuitable head to you, the elect, so that you
should act as its intermediary?

Schopenhauer s great Latin brother Leopard! still
seems to wait in vain for an introduction to the Ger
man people. His prose is more important to us than
his poetry which, as you know, was translated into
German in 69 by Gustav Brandes, and I believe more
recently by others (Lobedanz?). 2 But a translation
in the ordinary sense of the word is no good. What
is needed is a rendering dictated by affinity of thought
and spirit.

If only you would be the "Schlegel" in this case!
Also with profound apologies! may I suggest that
even from the purely material point of view the time
spent on such a work would in no wise be lost. A



"Note by Frau Foerster-Nietzsche : "This concise render
ing of one of the ideas incidentally expressed in Schopenhauer
as Educator pleased Nietzsche so much, that in Human All
Too Human he adopted it in honor of Billow."

-Note by Frau Foerster-Nietzsche: "Lobedanz made no
translations from the Italian. Biilow must mean Hamerling,
although the latter s translation did not appear after, but three
years before that of Brandes. As to Paul Heyse s translations
of Leqpardi, only a few of them had at that time appeared
in periodicals."



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 273

German translation of the Dialoghi and the Pensieri
would sell like hot cakes. N. B. Do you possess Leo-
pardfs works? I could send you my copy from Mu
nich (it is the best Livorno edition) at once.

I think you will agree with me when I say that I
should be better employed this Sunday in continuing
the reading of your book than in soiling any more
clean sheets of note-paper. Moreover I want to lend
it to your admirer Dannreuther 1 whom I am meeting
to-morrow. Later on, too, I should like to show it to
Franz Heuffer, 2 who is now busily engaged in pre
paring an English translation of "The World as Will
and Idea."

With best thanks and heartiest greetings I am ever,
with deep respect, yours,

HANS VON BtlLOW.

NIETZSCHE TO HANS VON BULOW.

Naumburg, 2. 1. 1875.
MY DEAR SIR :

I felt much too delighted and honoured by your
letter not to give your suggestion about Leopardi
very mature consideration. I know his prose work
only a little of it certainly. A friend of mine in Bale
has often translated passages of it and read them to



"Edward Dannreuther was a well-known Wagnerian,
who lived in London. In 1872 he founded the Wagner Society,
the concerts of which he conducted. Translator.

^ Dr. Franz Heuffer was a fellow student of Nietzsche s at
Leipzig. At this time he was contributing articles to German
newspapers and writing notices about the musical world of
London. Translator.



274 SELECTED LETTERS OF

me, and each time I was filled with surprise and ad
miration. We have got the latest Livorno edition!
(Just lately, too, a French work on Leopardi has
appeared, published by Didier; the name of the au
thor has escaped me is it Boute? 1 ) The poems I
know through a translation of Hamerling s. But for
my part I do not understand enough Italian, and al
though a philologist by trade, I am alas ! by no means
a linguist (the German language is a hard enough
nut for me to crack).

But the worst of it is, I have no time. I have re
solved to employ the next five years in working out
the remaining ten "Thoughts Out of Season," and
thus purge my soul as much as possible of all its
wilderness of polemical passion. As a matter of fact,
however, I hardly see how I am going to find time
for it all, for not only am I a University lecturer,
but I also have a Greek class in the Teachers Training
School at Bale. Hitherto my literary productions
(I should not like to call them either "books" or
"pamphlets" ) have all been tricked out of either short
vacations or times of illness, and I even had to dic
tate the Straussiad because at that time I could nei
ther read nor write. As my bodily condition is now
very good and no illness appears imminent and as,
moreover, my daily cold bath seems to guarantee my
never being ill again, my literary future seems to be
well-nigh hopeless unless my yearning and striving
after a country house ever comes to anything.



Boche-Leclerq. "Giocomo Leopardi. His Life and Works."
(Pris, 1874.) Translator.



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 275

Of course, my dear sir, you will never allow your
self to be concerned with such a modest possibility,
and that is why I must beg you not to think of me in
regard to your plan. The fact, however, that you
should have thought of me in that connection denotes
a degree of sympathy over which I cannot sufficiently
rejoice, although I realize perfectly well that for such
a position of mediator between Italy and Germany
there are many more worthy and suitable men than
myself.

Ever in deep respect,

Your devoted,
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO HANS VON BULOW.

[Santa Margherita near Genoa, December, 1882]
MY DEAR SIR:

Thanks to a fortunate accident I have just discov
ered that despite the loneliness that alienates me
from everyone and to which I have been forced ever
since 1876 you have not grown strange to me; this
thought gives me a pleasure hard to describe. It
comes to me like a gift and also like something on
which I have waited and in which I have believed.
Whenever your name has occurred to me it has al
ways made me feel stouter-hearted and more confi
dent, and whenever by chance I heard from you, I
felt at once that it must be something good that I
should understand. There are few men that I have
so uniformly praised in my life as you. Pardon!
What right have I to "praise" you !

Meanwhile I have for years lived a little too near



276 SELECTED LETTERS OF

to death, and what is worse to pain. It seems my
fate to be tormented and burnt as if by a slow fire;
however, I know nothing of the sagacity "that makes
one lose one s wits through it all." I will make no
mention of the dangerous nature of my emotions, but
this I must say, the altered manner in which I think
and feel and which has been expressed even in my
writings during the last six years, has sustained me
in life and almost made me quite healthy. What do I
care when my friends assert that my present attitude
of a "free spirit" is an eccentric pose, a resolve made,
as it w r ere, with clenched teeth and wrung by force
and imposed upon my genuine inclinations? So be it,
let it be a "second nature" : but I will prove yet that
with this second nature alone was I able to become
possessed of my first nature.

That is what I think of myself : as a matter of fact
the whole world thinks very badly of me. My visit
to Germany this year a break in the midst of my
profound solitude taught me a good deal and fright
ened me not a little. I found the dear German beast
ready to spring at me I am not "moral enough" for
them any longer.

In short, I am once more an anchorite, and more so
than ever before, and consequently I am thinking out
something new. It seems to me that the state of
pregnancy is the only one that binds us ever anew to
life.

Well, then, I am what I have always been, one who
respects you from his heart.

Your devoted, DR. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

Once upon a time I sent you a piece of my music
and you passed sentence of death upon it in the most
justifiable manner possible in rebus musicis et musi-
cantibus. And now, in spite of all that, I dare to send
you something else a Hymn to Life, to which I at
tach all the more the hope that it will be allowed to
live. One day either in the near or the remote future,
it will be sung to my memory, to the memory of a
philosopher who had no contemporaries, and who did
not even wish to have them. Does he deserve it? . . .

Be this as it may, it is quite possible that I may
have learnt something during the last ten years, even
as a musician.

Always as of old, your devoted friend,

During the course of this week my husband has
been so overwhelmed with work that he has not been
able to answer your kind letter himself, much less
read the music you were good enough to send him.
As I number myself among your admirers, dear sir
"at least, in so far as my limited intelligence permits"
I take the liberty of writing you these few lines



278 SELECTED LETTERS OF

on Billow s behalf and conveying to you his regret
at being unable to give any more satisfactory reply.
With the expression of our deepest respect,

I am, your devoted friend,
MARIE VON BULOW.

BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, February 25, 1874.
MY DEAR COLLEAGUE :

While thanking you most sincerely for the
"Thoughts Out of Season," you so kindly sent me, I
can for the present say only a few words about the
work as the result of a rapid survey. As a matter of
fact I have no right even to this, for the work is one
which exacts very mature and careful consideration,
but the subject lies so near one s heart that one is
tempted to say something at once.

In the first place my poor brain has never been
able to reflect nearly deeply enough upon the ultimate
principles, aims, and desiderata of the science of
history, as you have been able to do. As a teacher
and a university lecturer I am entitled to say that
I have never taught history for the sake of what is
pathetically called Universal History, but essentially
merely as a preliminary subject. I had to make my
pupils familiar with that framework with which they
could not dispense in the pursuit of all their other
studies, if everything was not to hang meaninglessly
in mid-air. I have done the best I could to guide
them to an independent assimilation of the past in
whatever form and to prevent this form of study



FRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 279

being distasteful to them. My desire was to enable
them to pluck the fruit with their own hands. Nor
did I ever dream of rearing a breed of scholars or
disciples in the narrow sense; I merely aimed at in
spiring each of my students with one desire and con
viction namely, that it was feasible and justifiable
for him to make his own that portion of the past which
was particularly suited to his own individuality, and
that there was a chance of his deriving some enjoy
ment from the process.

I am well aware that such aspirations may be
condemned as leading to amateurishness, and I con
sole myself with the thought. At my advanced age
one has to be grateful to Heaven if one has found,
even for the particular institution one belongs to in
concrete, an approximative guiding principle in re
gard to teaching.

I do not mean this as a vindication, nor do you,
my dear colleague, expect anything of the sort from
me. I mean it simply as a sort of rapid reflection
upon that for which one has hitherto striven and con
centrated all one s will. Your kind quotation of me
on p. 29 has somewhat disturbed me. 1 It occurred to
me when I read it that the metaphor was after all
not quite my own, and that Schnase may once have
expressed himself in that way. Well, I only hope that
no one will take me to task about it.

This time you will stir a large number of readers
inasmuch as you have brought sharply into focus a
truly tragic incongruity the antagonism between

*See page 25 of the English Edition of "The Use and Abuse
of History." (Vol. V of the Complete Authorized Edition.)



280 SELECTED LETTERS OF

historical knowledge and ability, personality, and also
that between the enormous accumulation of the col
lecting science in general and the material impulses
of the age. With reiterated thanks,

I remain,
Your devoted,

J. BURCKHARDT.
BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, April 5, 1879.

Your letter reached me at a moment when I was
just on the point of making a two-days excursion in
search of pleasant recreation, while you, dear friend,
are obliged to suffer so ! If only the climate of Geneva
would bring you some relief ! If a bise noire 1 should
come, don t forget to take refuge in the eastern cor
ner of the lake.

I duly received the supplement to "Human-all-too-
Human" from Messrs. Schmeitzner, and have read it
and relished it with ever increasing astonishment at
the abundance of your intellectual powers. As every
body knows I have never penetrated into the temple
of real thought, but all my life I have enjoyed my
self in the court and halls of the peribolos where the
figurative in the extremest sense of the word, reigns
supreme. Now your book contains the most varied
and richest supply of food for just such a careless
pilgrim as myself. And even where I cannot quite
follow you I watch with mingled fear and felicity the
certainty of step with which you wander about the



lf The ill-famed north wind of Geneva. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 281

most vertiginous precipices, and endeavour to form
some sort of image of all you must be able to see in
the depths and away across the plains.

I wonder what Larochefoucauld, Labruyere, and
Vauvenargues 1 would think if they happened to read
your book in Hades? And what would old Montaigne
say? In any case I know of a number of aphorisms
that would make Larochefoucauld, for instance, envy
you most profoundly.

With hearty thanks and best wishes for your health,

Yours,

J. BURCKHARDT.



BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, July 20, 1881.
DEAR FRIEND : 2

I am still turning over the leaves of your extraor
dinarily rich book with great relish. As you sus
pected, it is quite true there is a good deal of it that
goes against my grain, but then my grain is not neces
sarily the only true grain. What I am principally
and especially grateful to you for (as I have already
been in the case of your earlier works, particularly
"Human-all-too-Hunian," etc.), is the daring point of
view from which you envisage the life of antiquity. I
myself had the germs of a few of your ideas, but you
see everything so clearly, and your glance carries so

a B. was like N., an admirer of these French Moralists.
a A letter of thanks on the receipt of Nietzsche s "Dawn of
Day."



282 SELECTED LETTERS OF

much further and takes in so much more. You will
meet with many sympathisers in connection with that
capital aphorism entitled: "The So-called Classical
Education." 1

As to the other parts of the book, it is with some
giddiness that I, as an old man, watch the way in
which you, without any signs of vertigo, wander about
the highest precipices. In all probability a commu
nity will gradually form and increase in the valley,
whose members will at least be attracted by the sight
of so daring a climber of precipitous heights.

With my best and kindest wishes for your health,
I am your devoted friend,

J. BURCKHARDT.

NIETZSCHE TO BURCKHARDT.
Naumburg on the Saale, August, 1882.

Well, my very dear friend 2 or what shall I call
you pray accept with good-will what I am sending
you with good-will prepense. For, if you should not
do this, my book, "The Joyful Wisdom" will provide
you only with food for mockery (it is a little too
personal, and everything personal is, as a matter of
fact, comical).

After all I have at last reached a point at which
I am able to live as I think, and I may perhaps also
have learned to express what I really think. On that



Aphorism 195 in the above book.

" Letter accompanying "The Joyful Wisdom." (Vol. X of
the Complete Authorized English Translation of Nietzsche s
Works.)



FEIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 283

point I shall listen to your verdict as that of a final
judge. I should be particularly glad if you could
read Sanctus Januariiis (Book IV) consecutively so
as to be able to tell me whether it conveys the impres
sion of being a whole.
And what about my verses?
With cordial devotion,

Yours,
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, September 13, 1882.
DEAREST FRIEND :

Your "Joyful Wisdom" reached me three days ago
and you can imagine the renewed astonishment it
produced in me. To begin with I marvelled at the
unwonted cheerful lute-like Goethean ring of your
verses, a thing Avhich I never expected from you
and then the whole book and Sanctus Jamiarius at
the end! Am I mistaken, or is this last section not
a special monument you raised to one of the last
winters you spent in the south? It certainly appears
a complete whole. The question that always puzzles
me is what would happen if you ever taught history.
At bottom, of course, you are always teaching his
tory, and in this book you have suggested many a
surprising historical standpoint, but I should like to
suggest that quite ex professo you should shed your
kind of light upon universal history and in the focus



284 SELECTED LETTERS OF

which is within your illuminating power. How pret
tily and how contrary to the present consensus popu-
lorum 1 would a whole host of questions be turned
topsy-turvy ! How glad I am that I have long since
been in the habit of leaving the generally accepted
desiderata ever more and more in the rear, and have
contented myself with recording events without too
many flattering comments or too many lamentations.
However, a good deal of what you write (and the
most excellent part, I fear) is far above my head;
but wherever I am able to follow you I have a re
freshing feeling of admiration for your enormous and
so to speak concentrated wealth of thought, and real
ize how well off we should be in our science if we
could see things with your eyes. Unfortunately, at
my age one ought to be content if one is able to col
lect new material without forgetting the old, and if as
an aged coachman one can go on driving along the ac
customed highway without mishap until the day comes
when the order is given to unharness one s team.

It will take some time before I can proceed from
my hurried perusal of your book to a more careful
reading of it ; but this has been so with all your books.
I shall not be put out by the potentiality to tyranny
which you reveal on p. 234, paragraph 325.2


I now want for nothing save a good chat with you !
After having cleared up the question of the "meaning
of my life" how glad should I not be to listen to
what you have to say on the "meaning of all life"
(for the present I am more of an "ear" than anything
else) ; but this time the summer has not directed me
to Bale but to Rome! As to the little book I send
herewith I can only say this : at one time or another
every one of us unbosoms himself, and the kindness
he thereby shows himself is so great that he can
scarcely understand how deeply he has hurt every
one else in the process.

I have an inkling that this time I shall hurt you
more than I have ever done hitherto, but I also know
that you, who have always been so good to me, will be
even more so henceforward!

You know, don t you, how much I love and honour

you!

Yours

NIETZSCHE.

BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, September 10, 1883.
MY DEAR FRIEND:

On my return last Friday I found your kind letter
and your "Thus spake Zarathustra." This time your

This letter accompanied the first part of "Thus Spake
Zarathustra." Translator.



286 SELECTED LETTERS OF

work does not consist of a series of settled individual
reflections as has been the case hitherto, but of a re
sounding and mighty discourse upon the whole of life
from one pair of lips. It seems to me that in Ger
man countries it must enter those homes where, hig
gledy-piggledy, it will provoke both anger and enthus
iasm. In any case it will be sure to provoke anger ;
for, this time, dear friend, you have made things par
ticularly difficult for poor mortal men. But even
those who feel angry with the book canot help being
attracted by it. As for myself, I find a peculiar pleas
ure in listening to someone calling to me from a watch-
tower high up above my head and telling me of the
horizons and depths he can descry. It is then that
I realize how superficial I have been all my life,
and, to judge by my sort of relative activity, that I
am likely to remain so. For at my age a man is no
longer capable of changing the most he can do is
to grow older and weaker.

Hoping that the sky at Rome may prove beneficial
to your health, T remain&gt;

Ever your devoted friend,

J. BURCKHARDT.

NIETZSCHE TO BURCKHARDT.
Sils-Maria, Oberengadin, September 22, 1886.
MY VERY DEAR PROFESSOR r 1

I am truly pained at not having seen you or spoken
to you for so long! With whom would I fain speak,



This letter accompanied "Beyond Good and Evil." Trans
lator.



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 287

forsooth, if I may no longer speak to you ! The "sir
lentium" about me -increases daily.

Meanwhile I trust C. G. Naumann has done his
duty and sen* you my last book. Please read it (al
though it says the same things as my "Zarathustra,"
but differently, very- differently). I can think of no
one who has a greater number of first principles in
common with me than you have. It seems to me that
you have faced the same problems as I have that
you are working upon the same problems in a similar
way, perhaps even in. a more powerful and more pro
found way than I, because you are more silent. But
then it should be remembered that I am the younger
man. . . . The terrible conditions that determine
every advance in culture, the extremely ticklish re
lation between what is called the "improvement" of
mankind (or rather "humanization") and the "en
hancement" of the type man; above all the conflict of
every moral concept with every scientific notion of
life but enough, enough! Here is a problem which
fortunately, it seems* to me, we may have in common
with very few of our contemporaries or predecessors.
To give expression to it is perhaps the greatest feat
of daring on- earth, and that not so much on the part
of him who dares it, as of those whom he addresses.
My consolation is that, in the first place, the ears for
apprehending my prodigious novelties are lacking
your ears excepted, my dear and honoured friend. But
to you, on the other hand, they will not be "novelties" !

Your devoted friend,
DR. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

Address Gcnova, fcrma in posta.



288 SELECTED LETTERS OF

BURCKHARDT TO NIETZSCHE.

Bale, September 26, 1886.
MY VERY DEAR SIR :

First of all, let ine thank you most heartily for
sending me your latest work, which reached me safely ;
and let me congratulate you on the unimpaired vigour
with which it is permeated.

Unfortunately, as your letter which has since
reached me clearly shows, you overrate my capacities
far too much. I have never been able to follow up
problems such as those you tackle, nor have I ever
succeeded even in understanding their very premises.
I have never in my life had a philosophical brain, and
even the past history of philosophy is as good as a
closed book to me. I could not even claim as much
understanding as the scholars who have brought upon
themselves your strictures on page 135. 1

Whenever in the contemplation of history I have
encountered more general intellectual facts, I have
never done more than was absolutely necessary in the
circumstances, but have referred to more accredited
authorities. The elements in your work that I un
derstand best are your historical judgments, and
above all your glances into the age; your remarks
on the will of nations, and its temporary paralysis;
on the antithesis between the insurance of well-being
on a grand scale and the desirability of education by
means of danger ; on industry and "hard work" as de
structive of the religious instinct ; on the herd-individ
ual of to-day and his pretensions ; on democracy as the



Aphorism 204 in the English Edition. Translator.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 289

lineal heir of Christianity; and especially on the fu
ture strong men of the world! Here you describe
and lay bare the probable conditions of their rise and
their existence in a manner that cannot fail to arouse
the deepest interest. Compared with this how confused
and embarrassed appear the thoughts by which, at
times men such as myself are troubled with regard
to the general destiny of present-day Europeans.
The book is far above my old head, and I feel quite
foolish when I become conscious of the astonishing
range of your vision over the whole domain of modern
thought and your power and art of subtle differen
tiation in defining individual phenomena.

How gladly would I have gathered some news of
your health from your kind letter. As for me, owing
to my advanced years, I have resigned my Professor
ship of History, and for the time being shall only con
tinue my lectures on the history of art.

With kindest regards,
Your devoted friend,
J. BURCKHARDT.

NIETZSCHE TO BURCKHARDT.
Nice (France) Pension de Geneve
November 14, 1887.
MY DEAR PROFESSOR :

This autumn I once again crave permission to pre
sent you with an example of my work, a moralo-histor-
ical study entitled "The Genealogy of Morals." And
once more, as on every occasion hitherto, I send you
my latest work not without misgivings. For, I know



290 SELECTED LETTERS OF

only too well, that all the dishes served up by me
contain so many hard and indigestible elements that
to invite guests to share them, especially when the
guests are as distinguished as yourself, is more an
abuse of friendliness and hospitality than anything
else. With such feats of nut-cracking one ought to
remain discreetly alone, and imperil only one s own
teeth. For in this latest of my works I deal with
psychological problems of the very hardest descrip
tion, so much so, indeed, that almost more courage
is required to put them than to venture on any sort
of answer to them. Will you grant me your attention
once more? ... In any case I owe you these
treatises, because they are most intimately connected
with the last work I sent you ("Beyond Good and
Evil"). Perhaps one or two of the leading princi
ples of that difficult book are stated more plainly in
this one at least that was my intention. For the
whole world has been unanimous in declaring that
they could not discover the slightest meaning in "Be
yond Good and Evil" and that it must be a book of
"superior rubbish"; two readers only excepted: your
self, my dear Professor, and Monsieur Taine, one of
your most grateful admirers in France. Forgive me
if I console myself with the thought that hitherto I
have had only two readers, but such readers! The
exceedingly spiritual and painfully complex life I
have led hitherto (and thanks to which my constitu
tion, which is at bottom* a strong one, has been shat
tered) has gradually led me into a state of lonely iso
lation for which there is now no cure. My favourite
consolation is always to bear in mind those few men



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 291

who have endured similar conditions without falling
to pieces, and have known how to preserve a kind and
lofty soul in their breasts in spite of all. No one can
be more grateful to you than I am, my dear distin
guished friend.

Ever your devoted and unchanging friend,

NIETZSCHE.

P. S. Last, but not least, my best wishes for your
health! This winter promises to be severe. Oh, if
only you were here!

NIETZSCHE TO BURCKHARDT.

S&lt;ls-Maria, Autumn, 1888.
MY DEAR PROFESSOR :

Herewith I take the liberty of sending you a small
aesthetic treatise which, however much it may have
been intended as a respite amid the serious preoccu
pations of my life task, is nevertheless in its way a
serious work. You must not let yourself be led astray
for one instant by its tone of levity and irony. Per
haps I have a right to speak clearly for once about
this "Case of Wagner" maybe it is even my duty to
do so. The movement is now at the zenith of its glory.
Three-quarters of the musicians of Europe are now
wholly or partly convinced, from St. Petersburg to
Paris, Bologna and Montevideo, the theatres are living
on this art, and only yesterday, even the young Ger
man Kaiser characterized the whole of the Wagner
movement as a national affair of the first magnitude,

*This letter accompanied "The Case of Wagner."



292 SELECTED LETTERS OF

and placed himself at the head of it. These are suf
ficient reasons for allowing me to enter the lists. I
admit that in view of the international European
character of the problem, the essay should not have
been written in German but in French. Up to a cer
tain point it is written in French, and at all events it
might prove an easier task to translate it into French
than into German. . . .

It is no secret to me that not long ago, on a certain
day, a whole city, with reverential gratitude, piously
showed its recognition of its first teacher and bene
factor. With all due modesty I ventured to add my
own personal feelings to those of that city. With deep
love and respect,

Yours,
DR. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

(My address till the middle of November will be
Torino, poste restante. One word from you would
make me happy).

Frau Forster Nietzsche adds the following interest
ing note to the Nietzsche-Burckhardt letters:

"Jacob Burckhardt did not reply to this last let
ter, in spite of the touching request it contained and
on the occasion of a flying visit to me in 1895 he told
me that his reason for not doing so was that he had
not understood the book which accompanied it. He
had already found some difficulty in understanding
The Genealogy of Morals, and that is why on the
receipt of this book he only thanked my brother very
briefly and held out hopes of a letter to follow. From



FEIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 293

the way in which he spoke of these things, I could
not help thinking that the last few books my brother
sent him only distressed him, with the exception, of
course, of Beyond Good and EviP, of which he wrote
with appreciation. Although at the time of his visit
to me he was already a great sufferer, and it was
obviously difficult for him to recall the details of the
past, he nevertheless seemed to remember the contents
of Beyond Good and Evil. He also seemed to be
very glad when I told him how much his letter on
the subject had pleased my brother, but he assured
me that my brother had done him much too much
honour a contention with which the readers of these
letters will scarcely agree."

HIPPOLYTE TAINE TO NIETZSCHE.

Meuthin St. Bernard. Hte Savoie.
October 17, 1886.
(Translated from the French)
SIR:

I found the book you were good enough to send me
awaiting me on my return home from a journey. It
is, as you say, full of "hidden meanings". Its lively
and literary form, its impassioned style and frequent
paradoxical turns will prove an eye-opener to any
reader who wishes to understand your meaning. I
should recommend more particularly to philosophers
the first part on philosophers and philosophy 1 (Aph,
11, 13, 16, 20) ; though historians and critics will also
certainly reap a rich harvest of new ideas (for in-

Beyond Good and Evil."



294 SELECTED LETTERS OF

stance Aph. 28, 58, 209). What you say on the sub
ject of national character in your 8th essay is ex
tremely suggestive. I shall read that part again,
though you are far too flattering about me. Your
letter does me high honour in placing me beside Pro
fessor Burckhardt of Bale, a man for whom I have
the greatest admiration. I believe I was the first
person in France to call attention in the press to his
great work on "The Culture of the Renaissance in
Italy."

I beg you to accept my sincerest thanks and with
kindest regards,

I remain,

Yours sincerely,

H. TAINE.



NIETZSCHE TO HIPPOLYTE TAINE.

Sils-Maria, Oberengadin, July 4, 1887.
MY DEAR SIR :

There are so many things I have to thank you for
first and foremost for the indulgent kindness of your
letter, in which your remarks about Jakob Burck
hardt pleased me particularly, and also for your ex
ceptionally powerful and simple characterization of
Napoleon in the Revue which I came across by the
merest chance last May, I was fairly well prepared
for it (by a book recently published by M. Barbey
d Aurevilly, the last chapter of which dealing with
Napoleonic literature sounded like a long drawn out
cry of desire for what? undoubtedly for just such
an explanation and solution as you have given us of



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 295

that tremendous problem of the Monster and the Su
perman). Neither must I forget to tell you how de
lighted I was to come across your name in the dedica
tion of Monsieur Paul Bourget s last novel. But I do
not like the book. Monsieur B. will never succeed in
giving a convincing account of a physiological cavity
in the breast of a fellow creature (a phenomenon
of this sort is for him merely quelque chose d ar-
~bitraire from which it is to be hoped his delicate taste
will henceforward keep him aloof. But it would seem
that Dostoiewsky s spirit allows this Parisian novelist
no peace?) And now, dear sir, please be patient with
me and permit me to hand you two of my books that
have just appeared in a new edition. As you must
know I am an anchorite and do not concern myself
over much about readers or about being read. And
yet ever since I was in my twenties (I am now forty-
three) I have never lacked distinguished and ex
tremely loyal individual readers (these have always
been old men), among them, for instance, I reckon
Richard Wagner, the old Hegelian Bruno Bauer, my
honoured colleague Jakob Burckhardt, and that Swiss
poet, Gottfried Keller/ whom I regard as the only
living German poet. I should be most deeply gratified
if I could also count the Frenchman whom I most
admire among my readers.

I am very fond of these two books of mine. The
first, "The Dawn of Day," I wrote in Genoa at a
time when I was most seriously ill and in very great
pain. I had been given up by the doctors, death was



The well-known Swiss novelist.



296 SELECTED LETTERS OF

facing me, and I was the victim of incredible priva
tions and isolation. But at that time I did not wish
things to be different, and in spite of all I was at
peace with myself and completely resolute. The other
work "The Joyful Wisdom," I owe to the first rays
of sunlight and returning health. It was born one
year later (1882) also in Genoa, during a sublimely
bright and sunny fortnight in January. The prob
lems with which these two books deal bring about
isolation. May I beg you to accept these from me with
good will?

With deep respect,

I am,

Dear sir,

Your devoted servant,
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

HIPPOLYTE TAINE TO NIETZSCHE.

Hotel Beausejour.
Geneva, July 12, 1887.
(Translated from the French.)
Sm:

I am extremely sorry to have been away from home
when your two books arrived. I am still at Geneva
undergoing a water-cure, so I must postpone the pleas
ure of reading your work till my return. You are
more up to date in your knowledge of contemporary
French literature than I am, for I had never even
heard of the article you mention by M. Barbey d Au-
revilly. I am so glad that my articles on Napoleon 1





FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 297

seemed to you to ring true. Nothing could sum up
my feelings about him better than the two German
words you use Monster and Superman. 1

Pray, sir, accept my sincerest thanks and the as
surance of my deep regard,

Your devoted servant

HIPPOLYTE TAINE.

NIETZSCHE TO HIPPOLYTE TAINE.

Turin, November, 1888.
(From a Draft)
Dear Sir : 2

The book I now venture to place in your hands is
perhaps the most peculiar book that has ever been
written and in respect of that for which it prepares
the ground it is almost a piece of fate. It would be
of incalculable value to me if it could only be read
in French. I have readers now in all corners of the
globe, incidentally there are some in Russia. It is
unlucky for me that I should write in German, al-
thought perhaps I write it better than any German
has ever done before me. At last the French will be
able to feel through this book the deep sympathy they
deserve. All my instincts have declared war upon
Germany (see a special section, p. 50, "Things the
Germans Lack").

Could you just send me a hint or two as to whom
I ought to send copies of this book? ... A per-



expression is to be found in "The Genealogy of
Morals", p. 56. Translator.

Accompanying, "The Twilight of the Idols".



298 SELECTED LETTEES OF

feet and even masterly knowledge of German is cer
tainly the first prerequisite for the task of translating
it.

Ever yours in deep respect,

F. N.



HIPPOLYTB TAINE TO NIETZSCHE.

23 Rue Cassette. Paris.
December 14, 1888.
(Translated from the French)
SIR:

You have done me a great honour in sending me
your "Twilight of the Idols." I have read your whimsi
cal remarks (boutades), your humorous Carlylean
resumes, and your witty and profound dissertations
on the subject of modern writers. You are quite right
in thinking that your extremely literary and pictur
esque German style requires readers who are well
versed in German idiom. I am not a sufficiently good
German scholar to be able to understand the full
boldness and subtlety of your writing at the first
reading. My knowledge of German is confined to a
few philosophers and historians. As you are anxious
to find a really competent reader for your work I
do not think I should be far wrong in recommending
Monsieur J. Bourdeau, the editor of Le Journal des
Debats and La Revue des Deux Mondes. He is an
extremely cultured broad-minded man acquainted
with the whole of modern literature. He has travelled
in Germany and has made a careful study of her
history and literature from 1815 onwards, and is a



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 299

man of taste as well as a scholar. But I cannot say
whether he has the time to spare at the present mo
ment. His address is 18 Rue Marignan, Paris.
Pray accept my heartiest thanks and believe me,

Sincerely yours,

H. TAINE.

NIETZSCHE TO STRINDBERG.

November, 1888.
DEAR SIR :

The precious lines from Monsieur Taine that I en
close embolden me to ask for your advice on a very
serious matter. I should like to be read in France;
nay more, it is necessary for me to be read there.
Being as I am the most independent and possibly the
most powerful intellect of the age, condemned to ful
fill a stupendous mission, I cannot submit to the ab
surd limits the accursed dynastic national politics
of Europe have imposed upon her peoples, and I re
fuse to let such limits prevent me from greeting the
few whose ears are in the least attuned to the sound
of my voice. And I readily confess, it is in France
above all that I look for them. Nothing that happens
in the intellectual life of France is strange to me.
People tell me that in reality I write French although
my medium is German, and especially in my "Zara-
thustra" I have attained something that even Ger
mans have not attained. I venture to tell you that
my paternal ancestors were Polish noblemen, that my
maternal grandmother belonged to the Weimar of
Goethe s time, reason enough for my being to an al
most incredible degree the most lonely of Germans



300 SELECTED LETTERS OF

to-day. No word has ever reached me and to speak
quite frankly, I have never expected it. ... Now
I have readers everywhere, in Vienna, St. Petersburg,
Stockholm, New York all of them people of excep
tional intellect who do me honour I lack them in Ger
many. The fact that even in Germany people are feel
ing how little I am in keeping with them is proved by a
very serious article that appeared in the Kumtwart,
which I take the liberty to enclose. The author is a
musician of the first rank, the only one, if I am en
titled to an opinion in these matters, and consequently
unknown.

As it was my good fortune to be appointed a Uni
versity Professor at Bale at the age of twenty-four I
have not found it necessary constantly to wage war or
to squander my powers in merely reactionary move
ments. In Bale I found that distinguished man, Ja
kob Burckhardt, who from the first was deeply in
sympathy with me. With Richard Wagner and his
wife, who in those days were living at Triebschen,
near Lucerne, I enjoyed a friendly intimacy, which
was of the greatest possible value to me. At bottom
I am perhaps an old musician.

Later on illness severed me from these connections
and brought me into a state of such profound self-
consciousness as perhaps no man has ever attained
before. And as there is nothing morbid or forced in
my nature, I scarcely felt at all oppressed by this
solitude, but regarded it rather as an invaluable dis
tinction, as cleanliness so to speak. Nor has anyone
yet complained to me of sullen looks, not even my
self. It is possible that I have explored more terri-



FKIEDRICE NIETZSCHE 301

ble and more questionable worlds of thought than any
one else, but simply because it is in my nature to
love the silent backwater. I reckon cheerfulness
among the proofs of my philosophy. . . Perhaps
this is best proved by the two books that I am pre
senting to you to-day.

Yours,
FRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE.



STRINDBERG TO NIETZSCHE.
DEAR SIR:

You have certainly given mankind the deepest book
they possess, and not the least of your achievements
is that you have had the courage and perhaps also the
irrepressible impulse to spit all these magnificent
words into the face of the rabble. I thank you for
it. Nevertheless it strikes me that with all your in
tellectual candour you have somewhat flattered the
criminal type. Just look at the hundreds of photo
graphs that illustrate Loinbroso s "Criminal Man,"
and you will agree that the criminal is an inferior ani
mal, a degenerate, a weakling, not possessing the neces
sary gifts to circumvent those laws that present too
powerful an obstacle to his will and his strength. Just
observe the stupidly moral appearance of these honest
beasts ! What a disappointment for morality !

And so you wish to be translated into our Green-
landish language. Why not into French or English?
You can form an estimate of our intelligence from
the fact that they wanted to put me into a nursing
home on account of my tragedy, and that a spirit as



302 SELECTED LETTERS OF

subtle and rich as that of Brandes is silenced by this
"majority of duffers."

I end all my letters to my friends with, "Read
Nietzsche"! That is my Carthago cst delenda!

At all events our greatness will diminish from the
moment you are recognized and understood and the
dear mob begins to hob-nob with you as if you were
one of themselves. It were better if you maintained
your noble seclusion and allowed us others, 10,000
higher mortals, to make a secret pilgrimage to your
sanctuary in order to partake of your riches to our
hearts content. Let us guard the esoteric doctrine
so as to keep it pure and unimpaired and not spread
it broadcast without the instrumentality of devoted
disciples among whom is

AUGUST STRINDBEEG.



NIETZSCHE TO STRINDBERG.
DEAR SIR :

I think our parcels must have crossed. 1 I read your
tragedy twice with the deepest emotion; it surprised
me beyond all measure to discover a work in which my
own concept of love in its means, war; in its foun
dation, the mortal hatred of the sexes is erpressed
in a grandiose manner.

This work is predestined to be produced in Paris at
Monsieur Antoine s Theatre Libre. Simply insist on
Zola s seeing this through for you ! At the present mo-



Nietzsche s "Twilight of the Idols" and Strindberg s "Le
Pere."



FKIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 303

ment he attaches great importance to being treated
with consideration.

On the whole, I regret the Preface, 1 although I
should be loath to do without it ; it is so full of price
less naivetes. The fact that Zola is not "enamoured
of abstraction" reminds me of a German translator of
one of Dostoiewski s novels, who was also not "enam
oured of abstraction." He simply omitted "des rac-
courcis d analyse" they annoyed him. And fancy
Zola s not being able to distinguish types from "etres
de raison"! To think that he insists upon the com
plete "etat civil" for tragedy! But I almost shook
with laughter when in the end he even made it a
racial question ! As long as there was any taste left
in France at all, it was always the race instinct that
rejected precisely what Zola wants : it is precisely la



This refers to Zola s preface to Strindberg s "Pere," which
is as follows: Monsieur et cher confrere! J ai de bien grandes
excuses a vous faire pour mon long silence. Mais si vous saviez
quelle existence est la mienne, que de travail et que de tracas!
Te ne voulais pas vous renvoyer votre manuscrit sans 1 avoir lu,
et je viens enfin de trouver le temps necessaire. Votre drame
m a fortement interesse. L idee philosophique est tres hardie,
les personnages en sont tres audacieusement campes. Vous avez
tire de toute la paternite des effets puissants, troublants.
Enfin votre Laure est vraiment la femme dans son orgueil, dans
1 insouciance et dans le mystere de ses qualites et de ses defauts.
Elle restera enfonce dans ma memoire. En somme vous avez
ecrit une oeuvre curieuse et interessante, ou il y a, vers la fin
surtout, de tres belles choses. Pour etre franc, des raccourcis
d analyse m y genent un peu. Vous savez peut-etre que je ne
suis pas pour 1 abstraction. J aime que les personnages aient
un etat civil complet, qu on les coudoie, gu ils trempent dans
notre air. Et votre capitaine qui n a pas meme de nom, V03
autres personnages qui sont presque des etres de raison, ne me
donnent pas de la vie la sensation complete que je demande.
Mais il y a certainement la entre vous et moi, une question de
race. Telle qu elle est, je le repete, votre piece est une des rares
oeuyres dramatiques qui m aient profondement remue. Croyez
moi votre devoue et bien sympatnique confrere. Emile Zola.



304 SELECTED LETTERS OF

race latine that protests against Zola. After all, he
is only a modern Italian he swears by verisme.

Yours sincerely,

NIETZSCHE.

NIETZSCHE TO STRINDBERG.

Torino, Via Carlo Alberto, 6, III.
MY DEAR SIR:

Meanwhile someone in Germany has sent me "The
Father" as a proof that I too am interesting my
friends in the father of "The Father." Monsieur An-
toine s Theatre Libre was surely founded with the idea
of taking risks. Compared with what they have
risked there during the last few months your work
is completely innocent. Things went so far that Al
bert Wolf, in a leading article in the "Figaro," pub
licly blushed in the name of France. But Monsieur
Antoine is an eminent actor who would immediately
select the part of the captain for himself. On second
thought I now think you had better not involve Zola
in the affair, but advise you simply to send a copy of
the tragedy with a letter enclosed direct to Mon
sieur Antoine, Directeur du Theatre Libre. They like
to produce foreign plays.

Outside a grand funeral procession is marching past
with solemn pomp : il principe de Gavignani, a cousin

of the King and High Admiral of the Italian Fleet

i

Oh, how splendidly you have posted me up about
your Sweden! And how envious you have made me!

The rest of this paragraph is illegible. -Translator.



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 305

You undervalue your good fortune. fortunates
nimium sua si bona nesciunt that is to say, that
you are not a German. There is no other culture than
that of France; there is nothing to object to in it;
it is reason itself, it is necessarily the right culture
Do you want a proof of this? But you yourself are
the proof.

I return the books with heartiest thanks, as I pre
sume you have not many copies of them.

Just as your letter arrived I also received one from
Paris, from Monsieur Taine, full of the highest praise
for the "Twilight of the Idols," its audaces et finesses
and with a very serious recommendation to lay the
whole question of my 1 ... in France, including
the means thereto, in the hands of his friend the Editor
in Chief of the Journal des Debats and of the Revue
des Deux Mondes, of whose profound and emanci
pated intellect, style, knowledge of Germany and of
German culture, he could not speak too highly. As it
happens, I have read nothing but the Journal des
Debats for years. In view of this opening of my Pan
ama Canal into France, I have indefinitely postponed
the further publication of new books (three are quite
ready for press). First of all, the two principal
books, "Beyond Good and Evil" and "The Twilight of
the Idols," ought to be translated ; with these I shall
be introduced into France.

With all good wishes,

Your devoted

NIETZSCHE.

Apparently illegible. Translator.



306 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO STRINDBERG.

Torino, via Carlo Alberto, 6, III.
December 7, 1888.
MY DEAR SIR:

Has a letter of mine got lost? Immediately after
reading "The Father" for the second time, I wrote to
you, so deeply stirred was I by this masterpiece of
severe psychology. I also assured you of my convic
tion that the work is predestined to be produced in
Paris now at Monsieur Antoine s Theatre Libre.
Simply insist on Zola s seeing this through for you.

The hereditary criminal is a decadent, even an idiot,
that is certain ! But the history of criminal families,
for which the Englishman Gal ton (Hereditary Ge
nius) has collected the greatest amount of material,
always leads back to an individual who was too strong
for a particular social milieu. The last great crim
inal case in Paris, Prado, was a man of the classical
type. Prado was superior to his judges and his coun
sel, even in self-control, wit and high spirits ; notwith
standing the fact that the weight of the accusation had
so reduced him physically that some of the witnesses
recognized him only from early portraits.

But, now, let me tell you a word or two between
ourselves very much between ourselves. When your
letter reached me yesterday the first letter in my
life which ever did reach me I had just completed the
last revision of the MS. of Ecce Homo. And as there
no longer remains any such thing as an accident in
my life, you cannot be an accident either. Why do
you write letters that arrive at such a moment!



FEIEDEICH NIETZSCHE 307

"Ecce Homo" ought really to appear in German,
French and English simultaneously. Only yesterday
I sent the MS. to my printers ; as soon as the first sheet
is ready, it will be sent to the translators. Who are
these translators? Frankly I was not aware that you
had been responsible for the excellent French of your
"The Father." I thought it was a masterly transla
tion. In the event of your being willing to undertake
the translation I could not congratulate myself suffi
ciently on such a miracle of ingenious chance. For,
between ourselves, for the translation of "Ecce Homo"
a poet of the first rank would be required. It is an
expression of subtle feeling, a thousand miles removed
from all ordinary "translators." After all, it is not a
thick book. I should think the French edition (pub
lished perhaps by Lemerre, Paul Bourget s publisher)
would just make a standard 3 fr. 50 volume. Since it
is full of the most unheard of things and its language
is at times in all innocence that of a world-ruler, we
shall excel even "Nana" 1 in the number of editions.

On the other hand, it is anti-German to the point
of annihilation. I have kept firmly on the side of
French culture throughout ( I treat German phi
losophers, en masse, as unconscious counterfeiters).
Nor is the book tedious here and there I have even
written in the style of "Prado". In order to guard
against German brutalities ( confiscation ) I shall send
the first copies, previous to publication, to Prince
Bismarck and the young Kaiser, accompanied by a
written declaration of war. Soldiers cannot answer



The well-known novel by Zola. Translator.



308 SELECTED LETTERS OF

that sort of thing by police measures. I am a psycho
logist. Just think it over a bit, my dear sir. It is a
matter of the utmost importance. For I am strong
enough to cleave the history of mankind in two. There
still remains the question of the English translation.
Can you make any suggestions about that? An anti-
German book in England!

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.



STRINDBERG TO NIETZSCHE.

MY DEAR SIR:

I was overjoyed at receiving a word of appreciation
from your master-hand regarding my misunderstood
tragedy. I aught to tell you, my dear Sir, that I was
compelled to give the publisher two editions gratis
before I could hope to see my piece printed. Out of
gratitude for this, when the piece was performed at
the theatre, one old lady in the audience fell dead, an
other was successfully delivered of a child, and at the
sight of the straight-jacket, three-quarters of the peo
ple present rose as one man and left the theatre amid
maniacal yells.

And, then, you ask me to get Zola to have the piece
played before Henri Becque s Parisians! Why, it
would lead to universal parturition in that city of
cuckolds. And now to your affairs.

Sometimes I write straight away in the French lan
guage (just glance at the enclosed article with its



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 309

Boulevard, though picturesque, style), but at times I
translate my own works.

It is quite impossible to find a French translator
who will not improve your style according to the
rhetorical "Ecole Normale," and rob your mode of
expression of all its pristine freshness. The shocking
translation of "Married People was done by a Swiss-
Frenchman (from French-Switzerland) for the sum
of 1,000 francs. He was paid to the last farthing and
then they demanded, in Paris, 500 francs for revising
his work. From this you will understand that the
translation of your work will be a matter of a good
deal of money, and as I am a poor devil with a wife,
three kids, two servants and debts, etc., I could not
grant you any diminution in the matter of fees, par
ticularly as I should be forced to work not as a lit
erary hack but as a poet. If you are not appalled
at the thought of what it will cost you, you can rely
upon me and my talent. Otherwise, I should be happy
to try and find a French translator for you who would
be absolutely as reliable as possible.

As regards England, I really do not feel in a posi
tion to say anything whatever; for, as far as she is
concerned, we have to deal with a nation of bigots that
has delivered itself up into the hands of its women,
and this is tantamount to hopeless decadence. You
know, my dear Sir, what morality means in Eng
land: Girls High School libraries, Currer Bell, Miss
Braddon and the rest; Don t soil your hands with
that offal! In the French language you can pierce
your way even into the uttermost depths of the negro-
world, so you can safely let England s trousered



310 SELECTED LETTERS OF

women go to the deuce. Please think the matter over
and consider my suggestions and let me hear from
you about it as soon as possible.

Awaiting your reply, I am, yours sincerely,

AUGUST STRINDBERG.

STRINDBERG TO NIETZSCHE.

December 27, 1888.
MY DEAR SIR:

Many thanks for your kind letter and the copy of
that splendid book "The Genealogy of Morals." Allow
me to disturb your peace once again by sending for
your perusal a short poetical sketch. It contains my
views on the problem of conscience pangs, and had
already been written before I came across your works.
Please take no notice of such of my puerilities as
the forecast of the future of women and the remarks
about European peace, a subject which was an epi
demic in Switzerland, where I was staying at the
time I wrote "Pangs of Conscience."

I wish you a Happy New Year and beg to assure you
once again of my deepest admiration.


You will hear from me shortly about your short
story it goes off like a gunshot. I have appointed
a meeting day of monarchs in Rome. I shall order
to be shot.



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 311

Ail revoir! For we shall surely see each other
again.

On one condition only : let us divorce.

NIETZSCHE CAESAR.

STRINDBERG TO NIETZSCHE.

December 31, 1888.
(Written in Latin.)
DEAREST DOCTOR:

I will, I will be raving mad.

I could not read your letter without a severe shock,
and I thank you very much indeed.

"You would lead a better life, Licinius, if you
neither shaped your life constantly towards the open
sea, nor, shivering tremulously in the face of the
storm, held too closely to the treacherous coast."
( Horace. )

Meanwhile let us rejoice in our madness.
Fare you well and remain true to your

STRINDBERG.
(The best, the highest God.)

NIETZSCHE TO STRINDBERG.
MR. STRINDBERG:
Alas! ... no more! Let us divorce!

"THE CRUCIFIED."



312 SELECTED LETTERS OF

i



&lt;C( V*. I*



*



O man ! Take heed !

What saith deep midnight s voice indeed?

"I slept my sleep ,

"From deepest dream I ve woke, and plead

"The world is deep,



FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 313

"And deeper than the day could read.

"Deep is its woe ,

"Joy deeper still than grief can be:

"Woesaith: Hence! Go!

" Want deep, profound eternity !"



THE CORRESPONDENCE OF FRIEDRICH
NIETZSCHE WITH GEORG BRANDES

Translated by BEATRICE MARSHALL

The following letters which passed between
Nietzsche and Georg Brandes, the eminent Danish
litterateur and famous Continental critic of Shake
speare, belong to Nietzsche s last and most anti-Ger
man phase; the time when his magnificent intellect
though on the eve of eclipse was at the height of its
productivity and in the zenith of its splendour.

One after the other those later writings, with their
picturesque, suggestive titles, were struck off hot from
the forge of his fiery brain as if he had some premoni
tion of the coming catastrophe, and wished to work
while "it is called to-day" before the darkness of
eternal night overtook him. ... In loneliness
and isolation, deprived of the society of his beloved
sister, estranged from those with whom he had once
been knit in bonds of close and romantic friendship,
Nietzsche eagerly caught at the hand of goodwill held
out to him from Denmark.

The friendly relations between these two distin
guished men began in the autumn of 1887. But al-



314 SELECTED LETTERS OF

ready in 1883 Nietzsche had heard of Brandes inter
est in his work, and in the summer of 1886 a mutual
acquaintance had told Nietzsche at Sils-Maria that
Brandes had been making eager inquiries about him,
and denouncing the German friends who ignored his
books. This led to Nietzsche sending Brandes a copy
of "Beyond Good and Evil," afterwards followed by
the "Genealogy of Morals/ which Brandes acknowl
edged with the first of the delightful letters given
here.

"I can truly say," Frau Forster-Nietzsche writes in
her notes to this correspondence, "that these letters
were the one bright spot in my brother s life during
the winter of 1887 and 1888. I never hear the name
of Georg Brandes without tears of gratitude springing
to my eyes. It was just when my brother w r as in
absolute despair of finding anyone who would take
him seriously or understand what he meant for the
world that Brandes, through his letters and even
more through his lectures at the University of Copen
hagen, showed that there was one man at least who
was aware of the value and importance of this new
philosophy and felt the strong necessity of bringing
it to the notice of others."

Many years were yet to elapse before the Univer
sity professors of Germany were to prove wise in their
generation and courageous enough to lecture on Fried-
rich Nietzsche. But now the time has come when
nothing draws such large crowds to the class-rooms
as lectures on the Transvaluation of Values. All
honour is due, then, to Brandes, who recognised, be-



FKIED&ICH NIETZSCHE 315

fore it was too late to give the philosopher pleasure
by his recognition, the vast and far-reaching signifi
cance of Nietzscheanism.

TRANSLATOR.



BRANDES TO NIETZSCHE.

A year ago your publisher sent me your interesting
work, "Beyond Good and Evil," and in the same way
I have recently received your newest book. Besides
these I have in my possession another book of yours,
"Human, All Too Human." I had just sent the two
former volumes to the bookbinder when "The Geneal
ogy of Morals" came to hand, so I have not been able
to compare it with the others as I intend to do.

I hope by degrees to read everything of yours very
carefully. This time I feel that I must express my
sincere thanks to you for your gift. I consider it an
honour to be known by you, and to be so known that
you wish to win me for a reader. Your books bring
me in touch with a new and original mind. I do not
yet altogether understand what I have read, nor do I
exactly grasp your drift. But there is a great deal at
first sight with which my own views are in sympathy,
such as the underrating of ascetic ideals, the deeply-
rooted aversion to democratic mediocrity, and your
aristocratic radicalism. Your scorn of a morality of
pity is not yet quite clear to me; nor was my line of
thought completely at one with yours in your gen-



316 SELECTED LETTERS OF

eralisations on Woman as a whole in the other book.
You and I are so differently constituted that I ex
perience some difficulty in getting at the back of your
thought. In spite of your universality, you are very
German in your method of thinking and writing. You
are one of the few people with whom I should enjoy
a talk.

I know nothing of you personally. I am astonished
to see that you are a Professor and Doctor, and I con
gratulate you on being intellectually so little of the
professor. I am equally ignorant of how much you
know about myself. My writings merely attempt the
solution of certain modest problems. The majority
of them only exist in Danish. I have not written in
German for several years. My best public, I believe,
is among the Slav nationalities. I lectured two years
running in the French language at Warsaw, and this
year in St. Petersburg and Moscow. Thus I endeav
our to avoid the grooves of my native country. Though
no longer young, I am still one of those men who are
devoured by a passion for learning and an insatiable
hunger to know everything there is to know. You will
never find me, for this reason, unopen to argument,
however little I may be able to think and feel with
you. I am often stupid, but I am never in the least
biassed.

Let me have the pleasure of hearing from you if you
think it worth while to write.

Yours gratefully,

GEORG BRANDES.



F R I E D R I r IT NIETZSCH E 317

NIETZSCHE TO BRANDES.



To number a few readers whose opinion I esteem
and to have no other readers is exactly in accordance
with my wishes. But as far as the last part is con
cerned, I see that it is never likely to be fulfilled. AIT
the more fortunate am I in that "Satis sunt pauci," 1
the pauci are not lacking,, and never have been
lacking.

Among those of them living (to name the ones you
will know) are my distinguished friend Jakob Burck-
hardt; Hans von Billow, H. Taine, and the Swiss
author, Gottfried Keller ; among the dead are the old
Hegelian Bruno Bauer and Richard Wagner. It
is a genuine pleasure to me to know that a good Euro
pean and apostle of culture like yourself wishes to be
of the company. I thank you from my heart for this
expression of your goodwill.

Naturally it will involve you in perplexities. I do
not doubt myself that my writings still in some degree
are "very German/ You will feel this all the more
strongly, spoilt as you are by your own free and Gal-
lically graceful art of expressing yourself (a genial
art compared with mine). In my vocabulary many
words have become encrusted with alien salts, and in
consequence taste differently to my own palate from
what they taste to my readers . In the musical scale
of my own experience and circumstances the balance

ir The few are enough. Translator.



318 SELECTED LETTEKS OP

has been on the side of a rare, thin, distant pitch as
opposed to the normal average. And to speak as an
old musician, which I actually am, I have a fine ear
for crotchets. Finally, what makes my books obscure
is my distrust of dialectics, even of arguments. It
seems to me that what a man already believes or does
not yet believe to be true, depends rather upon his
courage and the degree of his courage. ( I have seldom
the courage to face what I really know.)

The phrase which you make use of, "aristocratic
radicalism," is very good. It is the most illuminating,
if I may be allowed to say so, that I have ever read
with regard to myself.

I hardly dare contemplate how far this method of
thinking has carried me or will yet carry me in the
realm of thought. But there are roads which once
started along permit of no turning back. So I con
tinue to go forward because I must go forward.

My Leipzig publisher shall send you all my earlier
books en bloc, that nothing be left undone on my side
to simplify your entry into my subterranean vault, in
other words, my philosophy. Especially would I rec
ommend you to read all the fresh prefaces. (The
books are nearly all new editions.) These prefaces
read consecutively may, perhaps, throw light on me,
provided that I am not darkness itself and dark to
myself, obscurissimus obscurarum virorum, 1 which is
quite possible.

I wonder if you are musical. A choral work of
mine, with orchestra, is just being published, called



The darkest of dark men. Translator.



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 319

"A Hymn to Life." 1 It is designed to go down to pos
terity as my "musical remains," and to be sung in my
memory, if enough of me is left to be remembered.
You see on what posthumous prospects I am existing.
A philosophy like mine resembles a tomb. One lives
in it no longer. Bene vixit qui bene latuit 2 is written
on the grave of Descartes. That is an epitaph with a
vengeance.

I, too, wish that we could meet.

Yours,

NIETZSCHE.

N. B. I am staying this winter in Nice. My sum
mer address is Sils-Maria, Upper Engadine, Switzer
land. I have given up my Professorial Chair. I am
three parts blind.



BRANDES TO NIETZSCHE.

The last words of your postscript are those which
left the deepest impression on me in your letter. You
suffer from eye trouble. Have you consulted the best
oculists? It changes the whole psychic aspect of life
if a man does not see well. You owe it to all who
respect and value you to do the utmost for the pres
ervation and improvement of your sight.



This interesting musical composition of Nietzsche s is to
be found in the appendix to the authorized translation of his
"Ecce Homo." Translator.

He has lived well, who hid himself well. Translator.



320 SELECTED LETTERS OF

I have postponed answering your letter because you
mentioned the sending of a present of books, and I
should have liked to thank you for these at the same
time. But as the parcel has not yet arrived I will write
a few lines to-day. I have got your books back from
the bookbinder, and though I am busy preparing lec
tures and have all kind of literary and political work
on hand, I have snatched as much time as I possibly
could to plunge deeply into their contents.

December 17.

You may call me a good European if you like, but
I am less willing to be dubbed an "apostle of culture."
All apostolic mission-work has become to me an abom
ination; 1 am acquainted with only moralising mis
sionaries, and 1 am afraid that I am not altogether
orthodox in my belief as to what is understood by
culture. Is there anything at all inspiring in our cul
ture taken as a whole, and who can conceive of an
apostle without inspiration? You see that I am more
isolated than you think. As for being German, I sim
ply meant that you write for yourself, and in writing
think more of pleasing yourself than of pleasing the
great public, while the majority of non-German writ
ers have to force themselves into a sort of stereotyped
st} r le which may be clearer and more plastic, but tends
to become shallow instead of deep. It necessitates the
author s keeping his best and most intimate self for
himself alone. I am often appalled at how little of
my inner self is more than merely indicated in my
writings.

I have no real understanding of music. Sculp-



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 321

ture and painting are the arts of which I have some
idea, and to which I owe my deepest artistic impres
sions. My ear is undeveloped. That it is so was a
great grief to me in my youth. I once played a good
deal, and for several years studied theory, but with
out any success. I am capable of enjoying good music
very thoroughly, but am one of the uninitiated.

I fancy I trace in your works certain points of
agreement in our tastes, a preference to Beyle, 1 for
example, and for Taine ; I have not seen the latter for
seventeen years. I don t know whether I am quite
so charmed with his work on the Revolution as you
appear to be. To him it is a lamentable upheaval, an
earthquake that gives him copy for harangues and
jeremiads.

I made use of the phrase "aristocratic radicalism,"
because it expresses so precisely my own political con
victions. But it rather hurts me to find in your writ
ings that you dismiss such phenomena as Socialism
and Anarchism with summary violence. There is
nothing stupid, for instance, in the anarchy of a
Prince Kropotkin. The name, of course, counts for
nothing.

Your intellect, so dazzling as a rule in its brilliance,
seems to me to fall short when truth is to be sought
in the nuances of a subject.

Your reflections on the origin of the moral idea
are of the deepest interest to me. To my delighted
amazement vou share a certain resentment that I har-



Henri Beyle, the novelist who wrote under the pseudonyro
of Stendhal. Translator.



322 SELECTED LETTERS OF

bour for Herbert Spencer. He stands, with us, for
the God of Philosophy. One distinct advantage these
Englishmen generally possess is that their unsoaring
mind shirks hypotheses, while on the other hand hy
pothesis has lost German philosophy the command
of the world. Is there not much that is hypothetical
in your notion of caste distinctions as the source of
various moral ideas?

I know Ree whom you attack ; I met him in Berlin.
He was a quiet man, and in his way a distinguished
personality, but he had a somewhat dry and limited
brain. He lived (according to his own account, purely
on platonic terms) with a quite young and very in
telligent Russian woman, who a year or two ago
published a book, Der Kampf um Gott, which, how
ever, could give no idea of her really fine gifts. I am
looking forward to the arrival of the works you prom
ise me. I shall be glad if you do not lose sight of me
in the future.


You should not repudiate the expression "apostle of
culture." How can anyone be such a thing in these
days more than by making a mission of his unbelief
in culture? Does it not imply a degree of self-knowl
edge and self-conquest which to-day is culture itself



PRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 323

to have realised that our modern culture is a mon
strous problem, and not by any means a solution?

I am at a loss to understand why my books haven t
yet reached you. I will not fail to give them a re
minder at Leipzig. These publishing gentlemen at
Christmas time are apt to lose their heads. In the
meantime may I be permitted to convey to you an au
dacious and unique document over which no publisher
has yet the control, an ineditum that belongs to the
most personal stuff which I am capable of producing.
It is the fourth part of my Zarathustra. Properly
speaking, its title in relation to what has preceded
it and is to follow should be Zarathustra s Tempta
tion ; an Interlude. Perhaps this will be the best an
swer to your question concerning my problem of
pity; besides, it will serve the purpose of a secret
door which opens up a gangway to me, always pro
viding that he who passes through the door has your
eyes and ears.

Your treatise on Zola, like everything I know of
yours (the last by you that I have read is an essay
in the Goethe Year-Book ) reminds me most pleas
antly that you have a natural bent for every descrip
tion of psychological optics. When you calculate the
difficult sum of the a me modcrnc you are just as much
in your element as a German savant when he attempts
it is out of his. Or it may be, your opinion of present-
day Germans is more favourable than mine. To me
it seems that year after year, with regard to res
psychologicis, they become ever clumsier and more
angular (the exact opposite of the Parisians, who are
all nuances and mosaic work), and so all profound



324 SELECTED LETTERS OF

events escape them. Take, for example, my "Beyond
Good and Evil." What bewilderment it has caused
them. I have not heard of a single intelligent utter
ance about it, much less of an intelligent sentiment.
I believe that it has not dawned on the most well-
intentioned of my readers that here is the outcome of
a sane philosophic sensibility, and not a medley of a
hundred outworn paradoxes and heterodoxes. Not
a soul has experienced the same sort of thing as I
have. I never meet anyone who lias been through a
thousandth part of the same passionate struggle. An
Immoralist, forsooth ! It conveys nothing to anybody.

By the way, in one of their prefaces the phrase
Document humain is claimed by the Goncourts. Yet
for all that, Taine may still be the original coiner
thereof. You are right about "harangues and jere
miads," but that kind of Don Quixotism belongs to
all that is most honourable on the face of the eartli,

With expressions of my highest regards,


Your publisher has apparently forgotten to send me
your promised books. But I have received your letter
to-day, and thank you for it. I venture to send you
in proof (because, unfortunately, I have no other copy
at hand) one of my books, a collection of essays in-



F R I E D R I C H NIETZSCHE 325

tended for exportation abroad, so for that reason not
my best wares. They date from different periods,
and are all too full of chivalry, praise, and idealism.
Never in any of them do I give voice wholly to my true
opinions. The essay on Ibsen is the best, but the
translation of the verses which was done for me is un
fortunately wretched.

There is a Northern writer whose works would in
terest you, if they were but translated, Soren Kierke
gaard. He lived from 1813 to 1855, and is in my opin
ion one of the profoundest psychologists to be met with
anywhere. A little book which I have written about
him (the translation published at Leipzig in 1879)
gives no exhaustive idea of his genius, for the book
is a kind of polemical tract written with the purpose
of checking his influence. It is, nevertheless, from a
psychological point of view the finest work I have pub
lished. The essay in the Goethe Year-Book was, worse
luck, made a third shorter because the space had been
reserved for me. It is better in Danish for that rea
son. If by any chance you read Polish, I will send
you a little book which I have published only in that
language. I see that the new Ri vista Contemporanea
of Florence has an article of mine on Danish litera
ture. Pray don t road it. It is full of the most
exasperating blunders, being translated from the Rus
sian. I consented to its being translated into Russian
from my French text, but I was unable to supervise
the translation. So now it appears from the Russian
in Italian with fresh absurdities, among other errors,
always G for H in names because of the Russian pro
nunciation. It rejoices me to think that you can find



326 SELECTED LETTERS OF

anything useful in me. For the last four years I
have been the best hated man in the North. The news
papers rage furiously at me every day, especially since
my last long feud with Bjornson, in which the moral
German press has without exception taken sides
against me. You may know his ridiculous drama,
The Gauntlet; his propaganda for the chastity of men,
and his compact with the female advocates of equality
of the sexes. Anything of the kind was, of course,
unheard of here before. In Sweden these shrieking
viragoes have formed leagues, and take vows that they
will only marry "virginal men." It strikes me that
they will get their husbands guaranteed like watches,
but with the future guarantee left out. The three of
your books which I know, I have read over and over
again. There are a few bridges? that connect my inner
world with yours, such as Ca?sarism, hatred of ped
antry, the appreciation of Beylo, &c., but for the most
part it is all foreign to me. Our experiences seem to
have been as wide as the poles asunder.

You are of all modern German authors, without a
doubt, the most suggestive and worth reading. As
for German literature, I cannot think what is the mat
ter with it ! It seems as if all the finest brains must
be absorbed by the Army Staff or have gone into pol
itics. The whole manner of life and all your insti
tutions promote among you the most ghastly uniform
ity and even authorship seems to be asphyxiated by
publishing.

With sentiments of honour and regard,

GEORG BRANDES.




You have put me in your debt in the most agreeable
way possible with your treatise on the idea of "mod
ernity." For during this very winter I am circling
round the question which stands in the first rank as
one worthy of consideration. I am trying, to the
best of my ability, in as unmodern a way as can be,
to take a very cursory bird s-eye, retrospective survey
of things modern. I admire let me confess it your
toleration in criticism and your reticence in judgment.
How you "suffer the little ones to come unto you,"
even Heyse. 1

I intend on my next journey into Germany to tackle
Kierkegaard s psychological problems, and to renew
my acquaintance with your older literature. That
will be of use to me in the best sense of the word, and
will serve to cajole my own critical harshness and
arrogance into a good temper. Yesterday my pub
lisher telegraphed to me that he had sent off the books.
I will spare you and myself the explanation of why
this has come to pass so late in the day. Make the
best of a bad business, my dear Sir. I mean of this
Nietzschean literature.

For my part I rather fancy that I have given these
"New Germans" the richest, most vital, and independ
ent books that they possess, and at the same time I
claim that my personality stands for a supreme event



a Paul Heyse, a veteran German dramatist, writer of "Novel-
en," popular in the last century. The Translator.



328 SELECTED LETTERS OF

at the present crisis in our estimating of values. But
this may be an error, and, what is more, a piece of
crass stupidity. I don t want to be forced to believe
in myself.

A few remarks now relating to my first-born work
("Juvenilia and Juvenalia"). The pamphlet against
Strauss, a malicious "making merry" on the part of
an extreme free-thinker at the expense of one who
imagined himself to be a free-thinker, stirred up a
tremendous scandal. At that time I was already Pro
fessor ordinarius, despite my tender age of twenty-
seven years, and in consequence a kind of authority,
something recognized, as it were.

The most ingenuous account of this controversy in
which every notability took part for or against me,
and over which an enormous quantity of ink was
spilled, is in the second volume of Karl Hillebrand s
"Zciten, Volkcr nnd Menschen." The head and front
of my offending was not so much that I held up to
ridicule the exploded machinery of an amazing method
of criticism, but that I should catch our German taste
in a flagrant and compromising lack of taste. Teu
tonic taste had, in spite of all religious and party dif
ferences, been unanimous in admiration of Strauss s
"Old and New Faith," pronouncing it a masterpiece
of acuteness and freedom of thought, and even of
style. My pamphlet was the first attack on German
culture, that culture which it was boasted had con
quered France. A phrase of mine, "Culture-
philistine," survived the thrusts of violent polemical
controversy, and has taken root in the language. The
two essays on Schopenhauer and Richard Wagner



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 329

represent, it appears to me to-day, more self-confes
sions, above all, more avowals of self, than any real
psychology of those masters who were both related to
me as intimately as they were antagonistically. I
was the first to distil, as it were, out of them both, a
kind of unity. At present this superstition is very
much in the foreground of German culture. All Wag-
nerites are disciples of Schopenhauer. It was quite
the other way when I was young. In those days it
was the last of the Hegelians who rallied round Wag
ner. And "Wagner and Hegel" was the battle-cry of
the fifties.

Between "Thoughts Out of Season" and "Human,
All Too Human/ there lies a crisis and a skin-casting.
Moreover, I lay physically for years at the gates of
death. This was, positively, a great piece of good for
tune. I forgot myself, lived myself down. And I have
accomplished the same feat a second time. Thus it
comes about that you and I have exchanged courtesies.
I think we are a pair of wanderers in the wilderness
who are glad to have met each other.


You are revelling, I expect, in beautiful spring
weather, while up here we have had abominable snow
storms, and have been cut off from Europe for sev-



330 SELECTED LETTERS OF

eral days. What is more, I lectured to-night to some
hundred more or less imbecile human beings.

Things look grey and sad around me. A little to
refresh my mind, I sit down to thank you for your
letter of February 19th and the precious present of
books.

I sent you, as I was too bus} 7 to write, a volume on
German Romanticism which I found in my cupboard.
But I do not wish you to think that my sending it is
meant for anything else than a silent expression of
thanks. The book was written in 1873 and revised in
1886, but my German publisher took upon himself to
make no end of linguistic and other alterations, so
that, for instance, the opening pages are hardly mine
at all. In every place where he failed to understand
or agree with my opinion he substituted something
else on the plea that what I had written was not Ger
man. Besides this, the. man promised to buy the rights
of the old translation of my book, yet from quite in
comprehensible reasons he has not done it; the con
sequence is that in two instances my book has been
suppressed by the German authorities on the ground
of its being piracy ( !) and of my having used bits of
the old translation, whereas the actual pirate of my
work is allowed to sell it scot-free !

The result will be, in all probability, that I shall
eventually withdraw altogether from contributing to
German literature.

I sent you the volume because I had not another to
send. But the first on the Emigrants, the fourth on
the English, and the fifth on the French Romanticists
are far better, having been written con amore. The



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 331

title of the book, "Modern Minds," is an accident. I
have written some twenty volumes. I wanted to ar
range a selection for abroad on well-known person
alities, and thus it came into being. A good deal in it
cost me much study ; for instance, the essay on Tegner,
which is the first true account of him. Ibsen as a per
sonality will be sure to interest you. He is unfor
tunately not as a man equal to what he is as a poet.
In thought he was much influenced by Kierkegaard,
and has remained saturated with theology. Bjornson
in his last phase has become a mere vulgar lay-
preacher. I have not published any book for more
than three years. I have been too unhappy. These
three years have been the hardest of my life, and I see
no sign of things becoming more cheerful in the fu
ture. Yet I now intend to start the sixth volume of
my "Main Currents," and also to publish another
book. It will take much time. I have taken hearty
delight in all the fresh books from you, and have
dipped into them and read here and there. Your
youthful productions are of great value to me; they
make everything much easier to understand. I can
now climb comfortably the stairs that lead up to the
tower of your intellect. I began too precipitately with
"Zarathustra." I would rather ascend steadily and
slowly than plunge headlong as into a sea. The essay
by Hillebrand I knew, and I had also read some years
ago bitter attacks on your book on Strauss. I am
grateful to you for the phrase, "Culture-philistine."
I had no notion that it originated with you. I do not
take umbrage at your scarifying criticism of Strauss,
though I cherish a pious regard for the old gentle-



332 SELECTED LETTERS OF

man. He was and always remained the pupil of the
Tubingen clerical college. Of the other works I have
till now only properly and carefully studied "Dawn of
Day/ I feel that I understand the book perfectly.
Many of the thoughts have been my own ; others are
new to me, or cast in a new form, which, however,
does not estrange me from them. That this letter may
not be too long, I will only touch on one more point.
I delight in the aphorism concerning the hazard of
marriage. But why do you not dig much deeper?
In another place you even speak with a certain re
spect of marriage which, through presupposing an
ideal of emotional nature, has idealised sentiment.
Here you are certainly bolder and stronger. But why
not once for all speak the whole truth about it? I
am of opinion that the institution of marriage, which
might have been very useful as a muzzle for the pas
sion of monsters, has caused more distress and misery
among ordinary mankind than the Church itself.
Church, monarchy, property, marriage, are the four
old, time-honoured institutions which humanity must
reform root and branch in order to be able to breathe
freely. And alone of these marriage kills individual
ity, paralyses freedom, and is a paradox incarnate.
The awful part of it is that humanity is as yet too
barbarous to be able to do without it. Authors of the
so-called emancipated and advanced type still con
tinue to speak of marriage with a mien of hearty de
votion that enrages me. And, after all, they are in
the right, for it is impossible to say what can be set up
in its place for the rabble. Nothing is to be done but
slowly to reverse public opinion. What do you think?



FBIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 33



I should very much like to know how your eyes are.
I was glad to see your handwriting so strong and
clear. Is your life, externally at any rate, passing
pretty peacefully down there in the south? Mine is
a combat that consumes. I am still more detested in
these climes than I was seventeen years ago. In it
self, it is not a pleasant state of things, but there is
this consolation to be derived from it, that it bears
testimony to my being still militant, and in no point
near to making my peace with mediocrity.
I am, your attentive and grateful reader,


I have wanted to thank you much sooner than this
for so pregnant and thoughtful a letter as your last,
but I have had trouble with my health, and have been
grievously hindered in all good works. I may men
tion in passing that my eyes are the barometer of my
general condition ; after fluctuations, they have en
tered on a period of general progress and improve
ment, and have become more sound and lasting than
I could ever have believed possible. Indeed, they have
falsified the prophecies of the very best German ocul
ists. If Grafe, the celebrated specialist, et hoc genus
omne, had been right, I should have been blind long
ago. It is bad enough to have come to No. 3 spec
tacles, but I can still see. I refer to this misery be
cause you were kind and sympathetic enough to ask



334 SELECTED LETTERS OF

after it, and because my eyes have been specially weak
and irritable during the last few weeks. I pity you
in your now more than usually dreary and wintry
North ; how can a man contain his soul in such a cli
mate! I admire nearly everyone who does not lose
faith in himself under overcast, gloomy skies, not to
speak of faith in "humanity," "marriage," "property,"
and the "State." In St. Petersburg I should be a
Nihilist; here, I believe as a plant does, in the sun.
The sun of Nice there is really no prejudice about
that. We have been enjoying him at the rest of
Europe s cost. God allows the sun, with his custom
ary cynicism, to shine on us idlers, "philosophers,"
and Greeks more beautifully than on the much
worthier military heroes of the Fatherland!

You are driven with the true instincts of the North
erner to choose the strongest stimulant, by aid of
which life in the North is made bearable. I mean
war, an aggressive, Viking warfare. I discern in your
writings the practised warrior, and not only is it
mediocrity that perpetually challenges you to come
out and fight in the open, but perhaps, too, the pecu
liarities of the more independent and important repre
sentatives of the Northern mind. How much
"parson," how much theology, is still concealed in all
this idealism? I should mind much more than gloomy
skies being obliged to get exasperated over matters
that did not a jot concern me.

So much for to-day, and it is little enough. Your
German Romantik made me reflect how the whole of
this movement has only reached its goal in music
(Schumann, Mendelssohn, Weber, Wagner, Brahms) ;



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 335

as literature, it has remained nothing but a splendid
promise. The French have been happier. I am afraid
that I am too much of a musician not to be a roman
ticist. Life for me without music would be a blunder.
With hearty and grateful greetings, dear Sir,


You have called the post a medium for impertinent
intrusion. As a rule, that is true enough; it ought
also to be a sat sapienti that it should not be allowed
to plague you. I am not by nature a pushing person.
So much the reverse, indeed, that I live a nearly iso
lated life, seldom write letters, and write, as a rule,
with reluctance, as do all authors.

But yesterday, when I had got your letter, and
taken up one of your books, I was seized with a sudden
spasm of anger to think that no one here in Scandi
navia knew anything of you, and I resolved, at one
stroke, to make you known. The enclosed little cut
ting from the newspaper will tell you that (having
just finished a course of lectures on Russia) I am
going to start a new series on your writings. For
many years I have had to repeat my lectures because
the University cannot hold the audiences; that will
hardly happen this time, your name being so abso
lutely new, but those who will come to get an im
pression of your works will not, I promise you, be of
the dullards,



33G SELECTED LETTEKS OF

As I am extremely anxious to know what you are
like in appearance, I beg you to send me a portrait of
yourself. I enclose my own latest photograph. Might
I ask you, too, to write me a brief and succinct account
of when and where you were born, in what years your
books were published (or, better still, were written),
for they are not dated? If you happen to have any
papers by you in which these facts are stated you
need not trouble to write them. I am a very un
methodical person, and keep no encyclopaedia of
writers on my shelves, or any other book of reference
in which I might find your name.

Your early writings, the "out of season" ones, have
been of great use to me. How young you were, how
full of enthusiasm, how candid and naive ! The works
of your riper years are still in parts not clearly in
telligible to me. They seem too often to generalise from
quite intimate and personal data, giving the reader
an exquisite casket without the key. But I under
stand the majority. I read with special enjoyment
your youthful work on Schopenhauer, and although
I owe personally little to Schopenhauer it struck me
as being spoken from my soul.

I offer a few pedantic corrections. On p. 116 of
"Joyful Wisdom" the words quoted are not the last of
Chamfort s; they are given by himself in Caracteres et
Anecdotes. See conversation between M. D. and
M. L. as an explanation of the saying, "Pen de per
sonifies et pew de choses m inter essent, mais Hen ne
m interesse moins que moi" The end is ". . . en
vivant et en voyant les hommes II faut que le cceur se
brise on se bronze." On p. 118 you speak of the



F R I E D R I C II NIETZSCHE 337

sublime pinnacle on which Shakespeare places Caesar.
To me Shakespeare s Caesar is pitiable, a piece of high
treason. And what of the glorification of the wretched
fellow who could find nothing better to do than thrust
a knife into a great man?

In "Human, All Too Human," II., p. 59, you say:
"It is the one sacred lie that has become famous."
No, the last words of Desdemona are perhaps more
beautiful and just as famous, constantly quoted in
Germany at the time Jacobi was writing about Les-
sing. Is this not so?

These trivialities are cited merely to show you how
attentively I read you. There are other matters, of
course, which I should like to discuss with you, but
this cannot be done by letter.

If you read Danish, I should be pleased to send you
a charmingly-got- up little book on Holberg. Tell me
if you understand our language. Should you by any
chance read Swedish, I must bring to your notice
Sweden s one genius, August Strindberg. When you
write about women you are very like him.

Give me good news of your eyes.


This is indeed a surprise, my dear Sir ! Where have
you acquired the courage to be desirous of speaking
in public on a vir obscurissimusf . . . Do you



338 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

imagine for a moment that I am known at all in the
dear Fatherland? It is there above all places that I
am regarded as something absurd and eccentric, some
thing that is not wanted and need not be taken seri
ously. Presumably they scent that I do not take them
seriously, and how could I in these days when German
Geist has become a contradiction in terms?

I am much obliged to you for sending me your pho
tograph. Unfortunately I am unable to return the
compliment, my sister, who has married and gone to
South America, having taken with her the last pho
tographs of myself that I possessed.

I enclose, however, a litle Vita, the first I have ever
written. As to the dates of the separate books, they
are given on the title-page flyleaf of "Beyond Good
and Evil." But you may have mislaid the leaf.

"The Birth of Tragedy" was composed between the
summer of 1870 and the winter of 1871 (finished in
Lugano when I was living with the family of the field-
marshal Moltke).

The "Thoughts out of Season," between 1872 and
the summer of 1875 (there were to have been thirteen
of them, but health happily said "No").

What you say about "Schopenhauer as a teacher"
gives me infinite pleasure. That little performance
serves the purpose of a distinguishing mark; he for
whom it does not contain much that is personal has
in all probability nothing in common with me. The
whole scheme according to which I have ever since
lived is drawn up in it. It is a rigorous foreshad
owing.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 339

"Human, All Too Human," with its two appendices,
came into being in the summers of 1876-1879 ; "Dawn
of Day," in 1880; "The Joyful Science/ January,
1882; "Zarathustra," 1883 to 1885, each part written
in about ten days in circumstances completely "in
spired." Every sentence came to me while taking
long walks in the open air, with such absolute sureness
that it might have been shouted into my ear. Intense
physical exuberance and elasticity accompanied the
writing. "Beyond Good and Evil" occupied the sum
mer of 1885 in the Upper Engadine and the follow
ing winter in Nice. Between the 10th and 30th of
July, 1887, the idea of "The Genealogy of Morals" was
caught, the work carried out, MS. completed, and sent
to the printers in Leipzig. (There is, of course, be
sides, Philologica of mine, only that is of no interest
to either you or me.)

I am now trying Turin, and shall be here till June
5th, when I go on to the Engadine. So far, I find it
severely wintry and raw. But the town itself in its
superb serenity appeals to my instincts. It has the
most beautiful pavement in the world.

Hearty greetings from

I was born on the 15th of October, 1844, on the bat
tlefield of Ltitzen. The first name I remember was
that of Gustavus Adolphus. My ancestors were Poles
belonging to the aristocracy (Niezky). The type



340 SELECTED LETTERS OF

seems to be well preserved, in spite of three German
mothers. Abroad I am generally taken for a Pole.
In the visitors list at Nice only this winter I was en
tered as a Pole. They tell me that my head is fa
miliar in MatejkoV pictures. My grandmother mixed
in the Schiller-Goethe circles of Weimar; her brother
succeeded Herder in the post of Weimar s General-Su
perintendent. It was my good fortune to be a pupil
at the celebrated and historic Pforta School, where
so many (Klopstock, Fichte, Schlegel, Ranke, &c.)
who have added lustre to German literature preceded
me. We had teachers who would have been (or have
been) creditable to every University. I next studied
in Bonn, later on at Leipzig, where the venerable
Ritschl, at that time the premier philologist of Ger
many, singled me out for distinction from the first. At
twenty-two years of age I was a contributor to the
Litter arischcs Ccutralblatt (edited by Zarncke). The
founding of the Philological Society of Leipzig, which
still exists, originated with me. In the winter of 1868-
69 the University of Bale offered me a professorial
chair, before I had even been made doctor. Where
upon the Leipzig University did me the extraordinary
honour of conferring on me the degree of Doctor with
out any examination or dissertation being required.

I stayed at Bale from 1869 till 1879. It became
necessary for me to give up my rights as a German
subject, owing to the fact that as an officer in the
Horse Artillery I was too often called out and dis
turbed in my academic duties.



Famous Polish painter (1838-93). Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 341

Nevertheless. I understand the use at least of two
weapons, sabre and cannon, and perhaps I know some
thing about a third. All went smoothly at Bale. It
often happened at promotion examinations for the
Doctorate that the examiner was younger than the
examinee! A great advantage I enjoyed there was
the genial relations existing between Jakob Burck-
hardt and myself; something quite unusual on the
part of that hermit-like thinker, who lived a very re
tired life.

Another still more incalculable advantage w T as that
from the beginning of my residence in Bale a quite
unusual intimacy sprang up between me and Richard
and Cosima Wagner, who at that time were living on
their country estate, Triebschen, on the lake of Lu
cerne, as much cut off from all their earlier connec
tions as if they were on a desert island. For several
years we shared every joy and sorrow ; a friendship of
unbounded confidence. You will find that in Wag
ner s collected works, Vol. VII., there is printed an
epistle to me apropos of the "Birth of Tragedy." My
relations with them brought me in contact with a
large circle of interesting men and women, in fact, the
best society that moves between St. Petersburg and
Paris. Towards 1876 my health began to decline. I
spent a winter in Sorrento with my old friend Baro
ness Meysenbug (author of Memoireii einer Idealis-
tin) and Dr. Ree, with whom I was then in sympathy.
It did me no good. An exceedingly painful and stub
born form of headache set in that exhausted all my
strength. As years went on it increased, and reached
such a. climax of habitual suffering that the year con-



342 SELECTED LETTERS DP

tained for me at that time two hundred days of tor
ture. The cause of the malady must have been en
tirely local, as any kind of neuro-pathological grounds
for it were absent. I never had the least sign of men
tal disturbance, no fever, no fainting. My pulse was
the whole time as slow as the first Napoleon s (60).
My speciality was to endure excruciating pain and
cru et vert with an absolutely clear brain for two or
three days on end, vomiting bile the whole time. A
report got wind that I was in an asylum (indeed, that
I had died there). Nothing could have been further
from the truth. My mind did not really mature until
this frightful time. Evidence of it is "Dawn of Day",
which I wrote in 1881 during a winter of unspeakable
wretchedness in Genoa, beyond reach of doctors,
friends, and relations. I composed the book with a
minimum of health and strength, so it stands for a
kind of Dynamometer of my powers. From 1882 on
wards I progressed, even if slowly, towards recovery.
The crisis was overcome (my father died young, at
exactly the same age at which I myself was at death s
door). Even to-day I have to be extremely careful;
certain conditions, climatic and meteorological, are in
dispensable. It is not choice, but compulsion, which
takes me every summer to the Upper Engadine and
every winter to the Riviera.

Finally, this illness has been of the very greatest
help to me ; it has set me free ; it has restored me the
courage to be myself. My instincts are those of a
brave, even of a military, beast. The prolonged strug
gle has slightly exasperated my pride of spirit. After
all, am I a philosopher? But what does it matter?



The first time I lectured on your works the hall was
not quite full, so few knowing at all who and what
you are. But a leading newspaper reported my lec
ture, and I myself wrote an article on you, so that
the next time there was hardly standing room in the
hall. Nearly three hundred listeners follow with the
utmost attention my exposition of your philosophy.
Still, I have not dared to repeat the lecture in this in
stance, as has been my custom for several years, be
cause the theme is so far from popular. It is my hope
in this manner to procure you some good readers in
the North.

Your books, very beautifully bound, are now ranged
in one of my book-cases. I should like to possess
everything that you have published. When you of
fered me, in your first letter, a musical work which
you had composed called "A Hymn to Life" I declined
the gift out of modesty, feeling that I was not a very
competent musician. Now I think that through my
interest in it I may be deserving of the work, and
shall be extremely indebted to you if you will kindly
send it to me. I fancy that I may find a summary
of the impression of my hearers in these words of
a young painter: "All this is so interesting because
it does not deal with books but with life." If there is
anything that does not please in your ideas it is only
that they sometimes put matters too much to ex
tremes. It wasn t kind of you to send me no photo
graph; my only reason for sending you mine was to



344 SELECTED LETTERS OF

put you in my debt. It really is not much trouble to
sit for a few minutes before a camera, and one knows
a man better when one has some notion of his appear
ance.

Yours with devoted regards,


What you tell me causes me the greatest pleasure,
and I must confess even more surprise. Be assured
that I shall not forget it of you. You know that all
hermits have retentive memories ! Meanwhile, I hope
my photograph has reached you. As a matter of
course, I immediately took steps (not to get photo
graphed exactly, for I entertain a profound mistrust
of ordinary photographers), but to get someone who
possesses a photograph of me to part with it ! I may
have succeeded, but I do not know for certain. In
any case, I will seize the opportunity the next time I
am in Munich probably this autumn to get myself
done in effigy. The "Hymn to Life" shall start on its
journey to Copenhagen one day soon. We philoso
phers appreciate nothing so much as to be mistaken
for artists. Moreover, I am told by leading and com
petent judges that the hymn is in every way good for
representation, and its performance would be certain
of success. The praise which pleases me most is that
it is pronounced "pure in phrasing." Mottl, the
distinguished Carlsruhe conductor (you know he con-



FBIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 345

ducted the Bayreuth festivals) has suggested giving
a performance of it.

From Italy comes the news that my point of view
in the second volume of "Thoughts Out of Season"
was honoured by being very favourably alluded to in
a resume on the history of German literature by a
Viennese savant, Dr. von Zackauer, who winds up
his article with it in the Archivio Storico of Flor
ence.

The last few weeks in Turin, where I shall be till
June 5th, have been better than any I have had for
years past. Above all, they have been more philo
sophic. Nearly every day I have for two hours reached
such a point of energy that I have been able to review
from an eminence my conception as a whole, all the
enormous host of problems lying spread out at my
feet in relief and clear in outline. Such a feat re
quires a maximum of strength which I scarcely dared
hope ever would be mine again. Everything fits into
its place, and for years has been tending in the right
direction ; a man builds his philosophy like a beaver ;
he is necessary, yet does not know it. ... Yet
one must see it all as I have seen it to be able to be
lieve his eyes. I am in such good form, so braced,
so lightened of a burden I can make a merry little
quip out of the gravest matters. How has it all come
about? Do I not owe it to the dear North winds, the
North winds which do not always blow from the Alps,
but bring messages too from Copenhagen?

Grateful greetings from your


I don t want to leave Turin without expressing to
you once more what a large share you have had in my
first, for a long time, satisfactory spring. The history
of my springs for the last fifteen years at least is a ter
rible tale of decadence and weakness. Places seem
to make no difference ; it was as if there was no pana
cea, no diet, no climate that could alter the essen
tially depressing character of that season. But now,
behold Turin! And the first good tidings, your tid
ings, dear Sir, which have given proof that I live. . . .
For I am in the habit now and then of forgetting
that I am alive. An accident, a question reminded
me this very day that a leading concept of life is
extinguished in me. I mean the conception of "fu
ture." No wish, not a breath of a wish in front of
me! Simply a calm sea! Why should not a day in
my seventieth year resemble exactly my days at pres
ent? Is it that I have lived too long in proximity to
death to open my eyes any more on beautiful possi
bilities? Anyhow it is a fact that I limit myself to
taking no thought further than to-day and to-mor
row. I arrange to-day for what is to happen to-mor
row, but for no day beyond. That may be irrational,
unpractical, and perhaps unchristian. Did not the
Sermoniser on the Mount forbid this taking thought
for the morrow but it seems to me in the highest
degree philosophic. ... It gives me a greater
respect for myself than I formerly had. I have grasped



FBI ED RICH NIETZSCHE 347

the fact that I have unlearnt the art of wishing with
out having intended it.

These halcyon weeks have been employed in "trans
valuing values." You understand this process? In
reality the alchemist is the most serviceable sort of
creature there is; I mean that he converts something
base and despised into something of value, and even
into gold. He alone creates wealth, others only re
fashion. My task this time has been quite unique; I
have asked myself what has hitherto been most hated,
feared, and scorned by men . . . and just out of that I
have manufactured my gold. . . .

It s only to be hoped that I shall not be reproached
for counterfeit coinage. But I shall be, of course!
Has my photograph reached you? In such an excep
tional case my mother has kindly consented to save
me from appearing ungracious. I trust, too, that my
Leipzig publisher, G. W. Fritzsch, has discharged his
duty and despatched the Hymn. To wind up with, I
own to a piece of inquisitiveness. As it was not
granted me to listen at a crack of the door in order
to gain some information about myself, I should be
glad to hear something iii another way. Three words
to characterise the subject of your lectures. How
much would I not glean from three words !

Most hearty good wishes, dear Sir,

Your
NIETZSCHE.



348 SELECTED LETTERS OP

BBANDES TO NIETZSCHE.

Copenhagen, May 23rd, 1888.
DEAR SIR:

Many thanks for letter, photo, and music. Letter
and music gave me unmitigated delight, but the photo
graph might have been better. It is a profile picture
done at Naumburg, characteristic in outline, but with
far too little expression. Surely you must look dif
ferent from that? The man who wrote "Zarathustra"
must at the same time have inscribed many more
secrets on his features.

I finished my lectures on Friedrich Nietzsche be
fore Whitsun. They ended, as the newspapers say,
with an ovation. The "ovation" is almost entirely to
your credit, not mine. I give myself the pleasure of
transmitting it to you in writing. All I did was to
interpret clearly and concisely and in a manner com
prehensible to a Northern audience ideas that have
their origin with you.

I attempted also to define your attitude with regard
to your various contemporaries, to penetrate into the
workshop of your thoughts, to dwell on points where
my own pet theories were at one with yours, to illus
trate where I differed from you, and in short to pre
sent a complete psychological picture of Nietzsche, the
man of letters. This much I may say without exag
geration : your name is now very popular in all intel
ligent circles in Copenhagen, and at least known
throughout Scandinavia. You have nothing to thank
me for; it has been a real pleasure to immerse my
self in your world of ideas. My lectures are not de-



FRIED RICH NIETZSCHE 340

serving of publication for the simple reason that any
thing purely philosophical is outside my province, and
I would rather not print what treats of a subject in
which I feel that I am not thoroughly competent. It
rejoices me to know that you are feeling physically
so "fit," and mentally refreshed. Here after the long
winter we have a mild spring. We are delighting in
the first young green of the trees, and also in a very
perfectly arranged exhibition of Northern art, which
is now opened in Copenhagen. Nearly all the leading
French artists, both painters and sculptors, are ex
hibiting in it as well. Nevertheless, I long to be on
the wing, but am obliged to stay.

I am afraid all this cannot interest you. I have for
gotten to mention that if you don t know the Icelandic
Sagas, you ought to study them. You would find
much in them to support your hypothesis and the
ories concerning the morals of a master race. There is
one very small detail in which you are not accurate.
Gothic has certainly nothing to do with God, nor with
good. It is connected with U lessen, to pour; he who
emits the sperm, and signifies stallion or male. On
the other hand, philologists here hold that your sug
gestion bonus duonus is strikingly apt.

I trust that you and I are never to become quite
strangers again in future.

I am,

Your faithful reader and admirer,
GEORG BRANDES.

What eyes yours are! It is quite true that the
Nietzsche of the photograph is not the author of "Za-
rathustra." He is two or three years too young. I
am much indebted to you for the etymology of "Gote"
(Goth) ; it is simply godly.

I presume that to-day you will be reading a letter
from me.

Yours always gratefully,

Herewith may I have the pleasure of recalling my
self to you by sending you a present of a mischievous
little piece of writing which all the same was very
seriously meant? It dates from the bright days at
Turin, but in the meanwhile evil days came in abun
dance, and such a decline in health, courage, and
"Will to live" to use Schopenhauerean language
that soon the little spring idyll seemed almost as if it
had never been. Luckily, I got out of it while it
lasted yet another document, the "Case of Wagner:
a Problem for Musicians." Malicious tongues are



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 351

sure to interpret this as "The Fall of Wagner." 1
I insist on your just glancing at this bit of musi
cian s psychology, no matter how much you may de
fend yourself against music, the most importunate of
all the Muses. For, my dear Sir Cosmopolitan, you
are far too European in your tastes not to discern a
hundred times more in it than my so-called compa
triots, the "musical Germans." I am, to sum up, in
such a case connoisseur in rebus ct personis, 2 and hap
pily a musician by instinct to such an extent that
the problem of value which is the root of this matter
can be (in my opinion) approached and solved via
music.

Really, the treatise might almost be said to be writ
ten in French; it would possibly be easier to trans
late into French than into German. Can you give me
a few Russian and French addresses of people to
whom it would be of some sense to post the treatise?
In a few months you may expect something philo
sophical from me under the title of "Musings of a
Psychologist." 3 I manage to tell the world, including
the talented nation of Germans, many home truths
pleasant and unpleasant. But all this is chiefly noth
ing but recreation from the subject-in-chief, which last
is called "Transvaluation of all Values." Europe will
be compelled to discover a Siberia bad enough for the
originator of this tentative attempt at valuing.



The German title is Der Fall Wagner; Vol. VII of Eng
lish edition. Translator.

-In things and persons. Translator.

3 He changed this title later to "Twilight of the Idols." Vol.
XVI of authorized translation. Translator.



352 SELECTED LETTEKS OF

I hope you will respond to my flippant letter with
one of your characteristically "resolute" epistles.

Your letter and your valuable present found me in
a raging fever of overwork, hence the delay of my
answer.

The sight of your handwriting was enough to
awaken within me enjoyable anticipations. It is sad
and deplorable indeed that you should have had such
a wretched summer. I was foolish enough to believe
that you had once for all come out of the furnace of
physical suffering.

I have read the brochure with the most careful at
tention and the most intense enjoyment. I am not
so unmusical that I could not appreciate the humour
of it. I am simply not a competent judge. A few
days before I got the little book I had been present
at a performance of "Carmen." What splendid music
it is ! All the same, at the risk of making you angry,
I must confess that Wagner s "Tristan and Isolde"
made a profound and indelible impression on me. I
heard the opera once in Berlin, when my soul was bat-



FRIEDBICH NIETZSCHE 353

tered and in a state of despair. I felt every note. I
don t know whether the impression made on me was
so deep, because I was so soul-sick.

Do you know Bizet s widow? You ought to send
her the brochure. It would delight her. She is the
loveliest, most charming of women, with a chronic tic
that, curious to say, is most becoming, but she is quite
genuine, full of sincerity and fire. The one thing
against her is that she has married again a Parisian
barrister, quite a sterling man, Straus by name. I
believe she understands German. I could get her
address for you, if it doesn t disgust you that she has
no more remained faithful to her God, than the Vir
gin Mary, Mozart s widow and Marie Louise did to
theirs. Bizet s child is of indescribable beauty and
charm. But I am gossiping.

I have given a copy of the book to our great Swed
ish author, Strindberg, whom I have completely con
verted into an admirer of yours. He is a true genius,
but a little mad, as are most geniuses (and non-
geniuses!). I ll see that the other copy is suitably
placed.

I know little of Paris now, but you might send a
copy to the following address : "Madame la Princesse
Anna Dmitrievna Tenicheff, Quai Anglais, 20 Peters
burg." This lady is a friend of mine. She is familiar
with the musical world of St. Petersburg, and will
make you known there. I asked her once before to
buy your books, but all of them, with the exception
of "Human, all too Human," were confiscated in
Kussia.



354 SELECTED LETTERS OF

It would perhaps be polite, too, to send a copy to
Prince Urussow (known to readers of TurgeniefPs
letters). He is keenly interested in everything Ger
man, is highly gifted, and a literary gourmet. Just at
this moment I cannot recollect his address, but I can
easily procure it. I am glad that notwithstanding
your physical disabilities you can do such daring and
vigorous work. It would give me the greatest joy
to be read by you, but, unfortunately, you do not
understand my language. This summer I have ac
complished an enormous quantity. I have written two
new big books (consisting of twenty-four and twenty-
eight sheets), "Impressions of Poland" and "Impres
sions of Russia" ; besides, I have entirely revised for
a new edition one of my earliest works, "^Esthetic
Studies," and corrected the proofs myself of all three
books. In a week or so I shall have this work off my
hands, and begin a course of French lectures, ajid in
the depths of winter I shall be off to Russia in order
to recuperate there. This is the plan I have arranged
for my winter campaign. May it prove no retreat
from Moscow!

Trusting that you will always retain your friendly
interest in me,

Yours truly and respectfully,
GEORG BRANDES.

NIETZSCHE TO BRANDES.

Turin, October 20th, 1888.
DEAR SIR :

Again a pleasant breeze was wafted to me from the
North with your letter, the only letter till now which



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 355

has put a goad face, or any face, on my Wagner phi
lippic. For nobody writes. Even among circles near
est and dearest I have created an irreparable breach.
There is, for example, my old friend Baron von Seyd-
litz, in Munich, who happens, as luck will have it,
to be president at this moment of the Munich Wagner
Society. My still older friend the attorney, Krug,
in Cologne, president of the Wagner Union of that
town; my brother-in-law, Dr. Bernhard Forster, in
South America, the well-known anti-Semite, and one
of the most zealous members of the Bayreuther Blat
ter staff; and lastly, my revered friend, Malvida von
Meysenbug, the author of "Memoiren einer Idealis-
tin," who puts Wagner on the same plane as Michael
Angelo. . . .

Moreover, I understand that I must be on my guard
against the female Wagnerite par excellence, who in
extreme cases would show no mercy. Probably Bay-
reuth will protect itself, after the manner of the Ger
man Government, by interdicting my book on the
ground that it is dangerous to public morals. My
dictum "We all know the unaesthetic temperament of
the Christian Junker" might in itself be interpreted
as lese-majeste.

Your digression on the subject of Bizet s widow en
chanted me. Please send me her address with Prince
Urussow s. A copy has already been sent to your
friend, the Princess Dmitrievna Tenicheff. When my
next production is ready, which will be before very
long (the title is "Twilight of the Idols," or "How
to Philosophise with the Hammer"), I should much



356 SELECTED LETTERS OF

like to send a copy to the Swede 1 whom you have in
troduced to me with such honourable mention. Only
I do not know where he lives. This tract is my phil
osophy in a nutshell . . . radical to the verge of being
criminal.

I, too, was once miraculously affected by Tristan.
A dose of soul torture seems to me to be a first-rate
tonic to take before a Wagner repast. The barrister,
Dr. Wiener, of Leipzig, gave me to understand that a
cure at Karlsbad was also advisable.

How industrious you are! And I, alas! such an
idiot that I cannot understand Danish. I can per
fectly believe that it is possible to recuperate in
Russia. I count any sort of Russian book, especially
one of Dostoiewski s, translated, not into German
( Heaven forbid ! ) , but into French, among those that
have brought greatest relief to my mind. 2 . . . From my
heart I am grateful to you, as I have every reason to
be.

Your
NIETZSCHE.

BRANDES TO NIETZSCHE.

Copenhagen, November 16th, 1888.
DEAR SIR :

In vain have I been waiting for an answer from
Paris giving the address of Madame Bizet. On the
other hand, I have obtained the address of Prince

August Strindberg.

Nietzsche apparently refers here to "The House of the
Dead; or, Prison Life in Siberia." It confirmed his own theory
that great criminals may be great characters. Translator.



FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 357

Urussow. He lives at 79 Sargiewskaia, St. Peters
burg. My three books are now out, and I have begun
my lectures here. It is remarkable how what you
write on Dostoiewski in your letter and in your book
concur with my impressions of him. He is a true and
great poet, but a vile creature, absolutely Christian
in his way of thinking and living, and at the same time
quite sadique. His morals are wholly what you have
christened "Slave Morality."

The mad Swede s name is August Strindberg; he
lives here. His address is Holte, near Copenhagen.
He has a special fondness for you, because he thinks
that he finds in you all his own hatred of women.
For that reason you are to him modern (irony of
fate). When he read the report of my spring lec
tures in the papers he said, "It is astonishing how
much there seems to be in this Nietzsche that I might
have written." His drama, "Pre," has just appeared
in French, with a preface by Zola. I am melancholy
when I think of Germany. What a development is
going on there at present! How sad to reflect that
from all appearances one will not see anything good
in the history of one s lifetime. It is a pity that
you, a learned philologist, cannot read Danish. I
am doing all I can to prevent my two books on Po
land and Russia being translated, so that I shall not
be banished or, at any rate, forbidden to speak when
next I travel there. Hoping that these lines will find
you in Turin or be sent after you,

I am,

Yours sincerely,
GEORG BRANDED



358 SELECTED LETTERS OF

NIETZSCHE TO BRANDES.

Torino, via Carlo Alberta 6,

November 20th, 1888.

Forgive me, dear Sir, for answering you on the
spot. Curious things are passing at this crisis in my
life, things which have never had their like. The day
before yesterday, again to-day. Ah ! if you could only
know what I had been writing when your letter
reached me ! With a cynicism which will become part
of the world s history I have now related "myself."
The book is called "Ecce Homo", and is an onslaught
on the Crucified without the ghost of a scruple; it
ends with thunderclaps and lightning flashes, that
deafen and blind, against everything that is Chris
tian or tainted with Christianity. I am, in short,
the first psychologist of Christianity, and, old artil
lery-man that I am, can fire heavier cannon than any
opponent of Christianity has ever before dreamed the
existence of. The whole is the prelude of "The Trans-
valuation of all Values", the work which lies ready
before me. I vow to you that in two years we shall
have the whole inhabited globe in convulsions. I am
a Destiny.

Guess who comes off the worst in "Ecce Homo."
Messieurs the Germans! I have told them awful
things. For instance, the Germans have it on their
conscience that they ruined the conception of the last
great epoch of history, the Renaissance, at a moment
when Christian values, the decadence values, were
humiliated, when these instincts in even princes of
the Church were yielding to the instincts diametrically
opposed thereto, the instincts of life.



FKIEDKICH NIETZSCHE 359

It meant simply the restoration of Christianity to
attack the Church. Caesar Borgia as Pope, that was
the conception of the Renaissance, its genuine sym
bol.

You must not be angry, either, that in a decisive
passage of the book you crop up. I wrote it as an
indictment of the conduct of my friends, their leaving
me completely in the lurch, both with regard to repu
tation and philosophy. At this juncture you come
on the scene with a halo of glory round your head. 1

What you say of Dostoiewski is just what I think.
On the other hand, I estimate him as the most valua
ble psychological material I know. I am grateful to
him in a quite remarkable fashion, however much he
may stand in contradiction to my deepest-lying in
stincts. As for my attitude to Pascal, I almost love
him, because he has taught me an infinite amount. He
is the one logical Christian.

The day before yesterday I read and was charmed
with Les Maries, by August Strindberg, and I found
myself at home in his pages. The only detriment to
my sincere admiration was the feeling that I was
at the same time admiring myself!

Turin is still my residence.

Where shall I address the Twilight of the Idols?
Should you be in Copenhagen for the next fortnight,
no answer is necessary.

See "Ecce Homo," page 130. Translated by A. M. Ludo-
vici. Vol. XVII of authorized edition. Translator.



Your letter found me in the thick of work; I am
giving lectures here on Goethe, have to repeat each
lecture twice, and yet people stand for three-quarters
of an hour in the square in front of the University
waiting to get standing room inside. It amuses me
to make a study before such a crowd of the greatest
among the great. I shall have to stay here till the
end of the year. But as an antidote to this arises
the distressing situation that one of my earlier books
so I am informed translated recently into Russian
has been condemned in Russia as irreligious, and
ordered to be publicly burnt.

I was afraid that owing to my two last books on
Poland and Russia I should be ostracised ; now I must
endeavour to enlist every possible interest in order
to be protected and granted permission to speak in
Russia. The worst is that nearly all letters from me
and to me are being confiscated. After the disaster
at Borki everyone is very anxious. 1 It came so soon
after the great assassinations. Every letter is snapped
up. I take a lively pleasure in knowing that you have
been so productive. Believe me when I say that I am
spreading your propaganda in every way I can. A
few weeks ago I earnestly recommended Henrik Ibsen
to study your books. With him too, you have some-


FKIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 361

thing in common, though very remotely in common. 1
Big and strong and unamiable is that eccentric, yet
lovable withal. Strindberg will be delighted that yon
appreciate him. I do not know the French translation
you mention, but they say here that all the best parts
in Giftas (Maries) are omitted, especially the witty
polemic against Ibsen. You should read his play
Pere. There is a fine scene in it. He would, of course,
be glad to send it to you. Can you imagine that he
abhors his wife psychically, but cannot physically
abandon her? He is a monogamous misogynist.

It is certainly extraordinary that the polemical
trait should still be so strong in you. In my early
youth I was passionately inclined to polemics; now
I can only depict men and combat powers in being
silent on them. It would be as impossible to me to
attack Christianity as it would be impossible for me
to attack werewolves ; I mean, as to write a brochure
against, belief in werewolves. Yet I see that we are in
sympathy. ... I, too, love Pascal. But I was early
all for the Jesuits against Pascal (in the Provin-
ciales). Clever men of the world, they were right;
he did not understand them, but they have understood
him, and what a master-stroke of impudence and
astuteness they edited his PromncMes with notes.
The best edition is that of the Jesuits. Another col
lision of the same kind was Luther pitted against the
Pope. Victor Hugo in the preface to the Feuilles
d Automne has this fine saying: "On convoque la


362 SELECTED LETTERS OF

diete de Worms mais on peint la chapelle Sixtine. II
y a Luther mats il y a Michel- An ge . . . et re-
marquons en passant qu-e Lutlier est dans les vieil-
lerles qui cronlent autour de nous et que Michel- Ange
n y est pas."

Look well at the face of Dostoiewski, half a Russian
peasant s face, half a criminal physiognomy, flat nose,
small, penetrating eyes beneath lids that quiver with
a nervous affection ; look at the forehead, lofty, thor
oughly well formed; the expressive mouth, eloquent
of numberless torments of abysmal melancholy, of
unnatural pleasures, of infinite compassion and pas
sionate envy! An epileptic genius, whose exterior
speaks of the mild milk of human kindness, with which
his temperament was flooded, of the depth of an al
most maniacal acuteness which mounted to his brain ;
finally of ambition, of monstrous exertion, and of
bitter grudges which create pettiness of soul.

His characters are not only poor and pitiable, but
refined simpletons, noble prostitutes, frequently suf
ferers from hallucinations, gifted epileptics, inspired
recruits for martyrdom, exactly the types we can im
agine grouped round the apostles and disciples in the
first era of Christianity. Undoubtedly no other crea
tures could be more remote from the Renaissance! I
am quite excited to know how I come into your book.

Yours most sincerely,

GEORG BRANDES.




Having been discovered by you no trick was neces
sary for the others to find me. The difficulty is now
to get rid of me.

THE CRUCIFIED.

