The Greek State

Preface to an Unwritten Book (1871)



We moderns have an advantage over the Greeks
in two ideas, which are given as it were as a com-
pensation to a world behaving thoroughly slavishly
and yet at the same time anxiously eschewing the
word " slave " : we talk of the " dignity of man " and
of the " dignity of labour." Everybody worries in
orHer miserably to perpetuate a miserable exist-
ence ; this awful need compels him to consuming
labour ; man (or, more exactly, the human intellect)
seduced by the " Will " now occasionally marvels at
labour as something dignified. However in order
that labour might have a claim on titles of honour,
it would be necessary above all, that Existence itself,
to which labour after all is only a painful means,
should have more dignity and value than it appears
to have had, up to the present, to serious philo-
sophies and religions. What else may we find in the
labour-need of all the millions but the impulse to
exist at any price, the same all-powerful impulse
by which stunted plants stretch their roots through
earthless rocks !

Out of this awful struggle for existence only
individuals can emerge, and they are at once
occupied with the noble phantoms of artistic culture,
lest they should arrive at practical pessimism, which
Nature abhors as her exact opposite. In the modern
world, which, compared with the Greek, usually pro-



4 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

duces only abnormalities and centaurs, in which
the individual, like that fabulous creature in the
beginning of the Horatian Art of Poetry, is jumbled
together out of pieces, here in the modern world in
one and the same man the greed of the struggle
for existence and the need for art show themselves
at the same time : out of this unnatural amalgama-
tion has originated the dilemma, to excuse and to
consecrate that first greed before this need for art.
Therefore' we believe in the " Dignity of man " and
the " Dignity of labour."

The Greeks did not require such conceptual
hallucinations, for among them the idea that labour
is a disgrace is expressed with startling frankness ;
and another piece of wisdom, more hidden and less
articulate, but everywhere alive, added that the
human thing also was an ignominious and piteous
nothing and the " dream of a shadow." Labour is
a disgrace, because existence has no value in itself ;
but even though this very existence in the alluring
embellishment of artistic illusions shines forth and
really seems to have a value in itself, then that pro-
position is still valid that labour is a disgrace — a
disgrace indeed by the fact that it is impossible for
man, fighting for the continuance of bare exist-
ence, to become an artist. In modern times it is
not the art-needing man but the slave who deter-
mines the general conceptions, the slave who
according to his nature must give deceptive names
to all conditions in order to be able to live. Such
phantoms as the dignity of man, the dignity of
labour, are the needy products of slavedom hiding
itself from itself Woful time, in which the slave



THE GREEK STATE 5

requires such conceptions, in which he is incited to
think about and beyond himself! Cursed seducers,
who have destroyed the slave's state of innocence
by the fruit of the tree of knowledge ! Now the
slave must vainly scrape through from one day to
another with transparent lies recognisable to every
one of deeper insight, such as the alleged " equal
rights of all " or the so-called " fundamental rights
of man," of man as such, or the " dignity of labour."
Indeed he is not to understand at what stage and
at what height dignity can first be mentioned — •
namely, at the point, where' the individual goes
wholly beyond himself and no longer has to work
and to produce in order to preserve his individual
existence.

And even on this height of " labour " the Greek
at times is overcome by a feeling, that looks like
shame. In one place Plutarch with earlier Greek
instinct says that no nobly born youth on beholding
the Zeus in Pisa would have the desire to become
himself a Phidias, or on seeing the Hera in Argos,
to become himself a Polyklet ; and just as little would
he wish to be Anacreon, Philetas or Archilochus,
however much he might revel in their poetry. To
the Greek the work of the artist. falls just as much
under the undignified conception of labour as any
ignoble craft. But if the compelling force of the
artistic impulse operates in him, then he must pro-
duce and submit himself to that need of labour.
And as a father admires the beauty and the gift of
his child but thinks of the act of procreation with
shamefaced dislike, so it was with the Greek. The
joyful astonishment at the beautiful has not blinded



6 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

him as to its origin which appeared to him, hke all
" Becoming " in nature, to be a powerful necessity,
a forcing of itself into existence. That feeling by
which the process of procreation is considered as
something shamefacedly to be hidden, although by
it man serves a higher purpose than his individual
preservation, the same feeling veiled also the origin
of the great works of art, in spite of the fact that
through them a higher form of existence is inaugu-
rated, just as through that other act comes a new
generation. The feeling of shame seems therefore
to occur where man is merely a tool of manifesta-
tions of will infinitely greater than he is permitted
to consider himself in the isolated shape of the
individual.

Now we have the general idea to which are to be
subordinated the feelings which the Greek had with
regard to labour and slavery. Both were considered
by them as a necessary disgrace, of which one feels
ashamed, as a disgrace and as a necessity at the same
time. In this feeling of shame is hidden the uncon-
scious discernment that the real aim needs those
conditional factors, but that in that need lies the
fearful and beast-of-prey-like quality of the Sphinx
Nature, who in the glorification of the artistically
free culture-life so beautifully stretches forth her
virgin-body. Culture, which is chiefly a real need
for art, rests upon a terrible basis : the latter how-
ever makes itself known in the twilight sensation of
shame. In order that there may be a broad, deep,
and fruitful soil for the development of art, the enor-
mous majority must, in the service of a minority,
be slavishly subjected to life's struggle, to a greater



THE GREEK STATE 7

degree than their own wants necessitate. At their
cost, through the surplus of their lajaour, thg^t
privileged class is to be relieved from the .struggle
for existence, in order to create and to satisfy a
new world of want.

Accordingly we must accept this cruel sounding
truth, that slavery is of the essence of Culture ; a truth
of course, which leaves no doubt as to the absolute
value of Existence. This truth is the vulture, that
gnaws at the liver of the Promethean promoter of
Culture. The misery of toiling men must still in-
crease in order to make the production of the world
of art possible to a small number of Olympian men.
Here is to be found the source of that secret wrath
nourished by Communists and Socialists of all times,
and also by their feebler descendants, the white race
of the " Liberals," not only against the arts, but also
against classical antiquity. If Culture really rested
iTpon the will of a people, if here inexorable powers
did not rule, powers which are law and barrier to the
individual, then the contempt for Culture, the glori-
fication of a " poorness in spirit," the iconoclastic
annihilation of artistic claims would be jnore tha.n an
insurrection of the suppressed masses against drone-
like individuals ; it would be the cry of compassion
tearing down the walls of Culture ; the desire for
justice, for the equalization of suffering, would
swamp all other ideas. In fact here and there some-
times an exuberant degree of compassion has for a
short time opened all theflood gates of Culture-life ; a
rainbow of compassionate love and of peaceappeared
with the first radiant rise of Christianity and under
it was born Christianity's most beautiful fruit, the



8 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

gospel according to St John. But there are also
instances to show that powerful religions for long
periods petrify a given degree of Culture, and cut
off with inexorable sickle everything that still grows
on strongly and luxuriantly. For it is not to be for-
gotten that the same cruelty, which we found in the
essence of every Culture, lies also in the essence
of every powerful religion and in general in the
essence oi power, which is always evil ; so that we
shall understand it just as well, when a Culture is
shattering, with a cry for liberty or at least justice,
a too highly piled bulwark of religious claims. That
which in this " sorry scheme " of things will live
{i.e., must live), is at the bottom of its nature a reflex
of the primal-pain and primal-contradiction, and
must therefore strike our eyes — " an organ fashioned
for this world and earth" — as an insatiable greed
for existence and an eternal self-contradiction, within
the form of time, therefore as Becoming. Every
moment devours the preceding one, every birth is
the death of innumerable beings ; begetting, living,
murdering, all is one. Therefore we may compare
this grand Culture with a blood-stained victor, who
in his triumphal procession carries the defeated along
as slaves chained to his chariot, slaves whom a bene-
ficent power has so blinded that, almost crushed
by the wheels of the chariot, they nevertheless still
exclaim : " Dignity of labour ! " " Dignity of Man ! "
The voluptuous Cleopatra-Culture throws ever again
the most priceless pearls, the tears of compassion for
the misery of slaves, into her golden goblet. Out of
the emasculation of modern man has been born the
enormous social distress of the present time, not out



THE GREEK STATE 9

of the true and deep commiseration for that misery ;
and if it should be true that the Greeks perished
through their slavedom then another fact is much
more certain, that we shall perish through the lack
of slavery. Slavedom did not appear in any way
objectionable, much less abominable, either to early
Christianity or to the Germanic race. What an
uplifting effect on us has the contemplation of the
mediaeval bondman, with his legal and moral rela-
tions, — relations that were inwardly strong and
tender, — towards the man of higher rank, with the
profound fencing-in of his narrow existence — how
uplifting ! — and how reproachful 1

He who cannot reflect upon the position of affairs
in Society without melancholy, who has learnt to
conceive of it as the continual painful birth of those
privileged Culture-men, in whose service everything
else must be devoured — he will no longer be de-
ceived by that false glamour, which the moderns
have spread over the origin and meaning of the
State. For what can the State mean to us, if not
the means by which that social-process described
just now is to be fused and to be guaranteed in its
unimpeded continuance ? Be the sociable instinct
in individual man as strong as it may, it is only the
iron clamp of the State that constrains the large
masses upon one another in such a fashion that a
chemical decomposition of Society, with its pyra-
mid-like superstructure, is bound to take place.
Whence however originates this sudden power of
the State, whose aim lies much beyond the insight
and beyond the egoism of the individual ? How
did the slave, the blind mole of Culture, originate ?



lO VARIOUS PROSE ESSAVS

The Greeks in their instinct relating to the law of
nations have betrayed it to us, in an instinct, which
even in the ripest fulness of their civilisation and
humanity never ceased to utter as out of a brazen
mouth such words as : " to the victor belongs the
vanquished, with wife and child, life and property.
Power gives thefirst rigkt,s.nd there is no right, which
at bottom is not presumption, usurpation, violence."

Here again we see with what pitiless inflexibility
Nature, in order to arrive at Society, forges for her-
self the cruel tool of the State — -namely, that con-
queror with the iron hand, who is nothing else than
the objectivation of the instinct indicated. By the
indefinable greatness and power of such conquerors
the spectator feels, that they are only the means of
an intention manifesting itself through them and
yet hiding itself from them. The weaker forces
attach themselves to them with such mysterious
speed, and transform themselves so wonderfully, in
the sudden swelling of that violent avalanche, under
the charm of that creative kernel, into an affinity
hitherto not existing, that it seems as if a magic
will were emanating from them.

Now when we see how little the vanquished
trouble themselves after a short time about the
horrible origin of the State, so that history informs
us of no class of events worse than the origins of
those sudden, violent, bloody and, at least in one
point, inexplicable usurpations : when hearts invol-
untarily go out towards the magic of the growing
State with the presentiment of an invisible deep
purpose, where the calculating intellect is enabled to
see an addition of forces only ; when now the State



THE GREEK STATE II

is even contemplated with fervour as the goal and
ultimate aim of the sacrifices and duties of the indi-
vidual : then out of all that speaks the enormous
necessity of the State, without which Nature might
not succeed in coming, through Society, to her de-
liverance in semblance, in the mirror of the; geniug.
What discernments does the instinctive pleasure in
the State not overcome ! One would indeed feel
inclined to think that a man who looks into the
origin of the State will henceforth seek his salva-
tion at an awful distance from it ; and where can
one not see the monuments of its origin — devastated
lands, destroyed cities, brutalised men, devouring
hatred of nations ! The State, of ignominiously low
birth, for the majority of men a continually flowing
source of hardship, at frequently recurring periods
the consuming torch of mankind — and yet a word,
at which we forget ourselves, a battle cry, which has
filled men with enthusiasm for innumerable really
heroic "deeds, perhaps the highest and most venerable
object for the blind and egoistic multitude which
only in the tremendous moments of State-life has
the strange expression of greatness on its face !

We have, however, to consider the Greeks, with
regard to the unique sun-height of their art, as the
" political men in themselves," and certainly history
knows of no second instance of such an awful un-
chaining of the political passion, such an uncondi-
tional immolation of all other interests in the service
of this State-instinct ; at the best one might dis-
tinguish the men of the Renascence in Italy with a
similar title for like reasons and by way of com-
parison. So overloaded is that passion among the



12 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Greeks that it begins ever anew to rage against itself
and to strike its teeth into its own flesh. This
bloody jealousy of city against city, of party against
party, this murderous greed of those little wars,
the tiger-like triumph over the corpse of the slain
enemy, in short, the incessant renewal of those
Trojan scenes of struggle and horror, in the spec-
tacle of which, as a genuine Hellene, Homer stands
before us absorbed with delight — whither does this
naive barbarism of the Greek State point ? What
is its excuse before the tribunal of eternal justice ?
Proud and calm, the State steps before this tribunal
and by the hand it leads the flower of blossoming
womanhood : Greek society. For this Helena the
State waged those wars — and what grey-bearded
judge could here condemn ? —

Under this mysterious connection, which we here
divine between State and art, political greed and
artistic creation, battlefield and work of art, we
understand by the State, as already remarked, only
the cramp-iron, which compels the Social process ;
whereas without the State, in the natural bellum om-
nium contra omnes Society cannot strike root at all
on a larger scale and beyond the reach of the family.
Now, after States have been established almost
everywhere, that bent of the bellum omnium contra
omnes concentrates itself from time to time into a
terrible gathering of war-clouds and discharges itself
as it were in rare but so much the more violent
shocks and lightning flashes. But in consequence
of the effect of that bellum, — an effect which is turned
inwards and compressed, — Society is given time
during the intervals to germinate and burst into leaf,



THE GREEK STATE 13

in order, as soon as warmer days come, to let the
shining blossoms of genius sprout forth.

In face of the political world of the Hellenes, I
will not hide those phenomena of the present in
which I believe I discern dangerous atrophies of the
political sphere equally critical for art and society.
If thereshould exist men, who as itwere through birth
are placed outside the national- and State-instincts,
who consequently have to esteem the State only in so
far as they conceive that it coincides with their own
interest, then such men will necessarily imagine as
the ultimate political aim the most undisturbed col-
lateral existence of great political communities pos-
sible,in which ^^^might be permitted to pursue their
own purposes without restriction. With this idea in
their heads they will promote that policy which will
offer the greatest security to these purposes ; whereas
it is unthinkable, that they, against their intentions,
guided perhaps by an unconscious instinct, should
sacrifice themselves for the State-tendency, unthink-
able because they lack that very instinct. All other
citizens of the State are in the dark about what
Nature intends with her State-instinct within them,
and they follow blindly ; only those who stand
outside this instinct know what they want from the
State and what the State is to grant them. There-
fore it is almost unavoidable that such men
should gain great influence in the State because
they are allowed to consider it as a means, whereas
all the others under the sway of those unconscious
purposes of the State are themselves only means
for the fulfilment of the State-purpose. In order
now to attain, through the medium of the State,



14 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

the highest furtherance of their selfish aims, it is
above all necessary, that the State be wholly freed
from those awfully incalculable war-convulsions so
that it may be used rationally ; and thereby they
strive with all their might for a condition of things
in which war is an impossibility. For that purpose
the thing to do is first to curtail and to enfeeble the
political separatisms and factions and through the
establishment of large equipoised State-bodies and
the mutual safeguarding of them to make the suc-
cessful result of an aggressive war and consequently
war itself the greatest improbability; as on the other
hand they will endeavour to wrest the question of
war and peace from the decision of individual lords,
in order to be able rather to appeal to the egoism
of the masses or their representatives ; for which
purpose they again need slowly to dissolve the
monarchic instincts of the nations. This purpose
they attain best through the most general promul-
gation of the liberal optimistic view of the world,
which has its roots in the doctrines of French
Rationalism and the French Revolution, i.e., in a
wholly un-Germanic, genuinely neo-Latin shallow
and unmetaphysical philosophy. I cannot help
seeing in the prevailing international movements
of the present day, and the simultaneous promulga-
tion of universal suffrage, the effects of the fear
of war above everything else, yea I behold behrhd
these movements, those truly international home-
less money-hermits, as the really alarmed, who,
with their natural lack of the State-instinct, have
learnt to abuse politics as a means of the Exchange,
and State and Society as an apparatus for their own



THE GREEK STATE 1 5

enrichment. Against the deviation of the State-
tendency into a money-tendency, to be feared from
this side, the onl^ remedy is wa£ and once again
war, in the emotions of which this at least becomes
obvious, that the State is not founded upon the fear
of the war-demon, as a protective institution for
egoistic individuals, but in love to fatherland and
prince, it produces an ethical impulse, indicative of
a much higher destiny. If I therefore designate as
a dangerous and characteristic sign of the present
political situation the application of revolutionary
thought in the service of a selfish State-less
money-aristocracy, if at the same time I conceive
of the enormous dissemination of liberal optimism
as the result of modern financial affairs fallen
into strange hands, and if I imagine all evils
or"soicial conditions together with the necessary
decay of the arts to have either germinated from
that root or grown together with it, one will have
to pardon my occasionally chanting a Paean on war.
Horribly clangs its silvery bow ; and although it
comes along like the night, war is nevertheless
Apollo, the true divinity for consecrating and puri-
fying the State. First of all, however, as is said in
the beginning of the " Iliad," he lets fly his arrow
on the mules and dogs. Then he strikes the men
themselves, and everywhere pyres break into flames.
Be it then pronounced that war is just as much a
necessity for the State as the slave is for society,
and who can avoid this verdict if he honestly asks
himself about the causes of the never- equalled Greek
art-perfection ?

He who contemplates war and its uniformed pos-



ID VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

sibility, the soldier's profession, with respect to the
hitherto described nature of the State, must arrive
at the conviction, that through war and in the pro-
fession of arms is placed before our eyes an image,
or even perhaps the prototype of the State. Here we
see as the most general effect of the war-tendency an
immediate decomposition and division of the chaotic
mass into military castes, out of which rises, pyramid-
shaped, on an exceedingly broad base of slaves the
edifice of the " martial society." The unconscious
purpose of the whole movement constrains every in-
dividual under its yoke, and produces also in hetero-
geneous natures as it were a chemical transformation
of their qualities until they are brought into affinity
with that purpose. In the highest castes one per-
ceives already a little more of what in this internal
process is involved at the bottom, namely the crea-
tion of the military genius — with whom we have
become acquainted as the original founder of states.
In the case of many States, as, for example, in th"e-
Lycurgian constitution of Sparta, one can distinctly
perceive the impress of that fundamental idea of the
State, that of the creation of the military genius. IF
we now imagine the military primal State in its
greatest activity, at its proper " labour," and if we
fix our glance upon the whole technique of war,
we cannot avoid correcting our notions picked up
from everywhere, as to the " dignity of man " and
the " dignity of labour " by the question, whether
the idea of dignity is applicable also to that labour,
which has as its purpose the destruction of the_
" dignified " man, as well as to the man who is
entrusted with that " dignified labour," or whether



THE GREEK STATE 1/

in this warlike task of the State those mutually
contradictory ideas do not neutralise one another. I
should like to think the warlike man to be a means
of the military genius and his labour again only
a tool in the hands of that same genius ; and not
to him, as absolute man and non-genius, but to him
as a means of the genius — whose pleasure also can
be to choose his tool's destruction as a mere pawn
sacrificed on the strategist's chessboard — is due a
degree of dignity, of that dignity namely, to have
been deemed worthy of being a means of the genius.
But what is shown here in a single instance is valid
in the most general sense ; every human being, with
his total activity, only has dignity in so far as he is
a tool of the genius, consciously or unconsciously ;
from this we may immediately deduce the ethical
conclusion, that "man in himself," the absolute man
possesses neither dignity, nor rights, nor duties;
only as a wholly determined being serving uncon-
scious purposes can man excuse his existence.

Plato's perfect State is according to these con-
siderations certainly something still greater than
even the warm-blooded among his admirers believe,
not to mention the smiling mien of superiority with
which our "historically" educated refuse such a
fruit of antiquity. The proper aim of the State,
the Olympian existence and ever-renewed procrea-
tion and preparation of the genius, — compared with
which all other things are only tools, expedients
and factors towards realisation — is here discovered
with a poetic intuition and painted with firmness.
Plato saw through the awfully devastated Herma
of the then-existing State-life and perceived even



I 8 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

then something divine in its interior. He believed
that one might be able to take out this divine image
and that the grim and barbarically distorted out-
side and shell did not belong to the essence of the
State : the whole fervour and sublimity of his politi-
cal passion threw itself upon this belief, upon that
desire — and in the flames of this fire he perished.
That in his perfect State he did not place at the
head the genius in its general meaning, but only
the genius of wisdom and of knowledge, that he
altogether excluded the inspired artist from his
State, that was a rigid consequence of the Socratian
judgment on art, which Plato, struggling against
himself, had made his own. This more external,
almost incidental gap must not prevent our recog-
nising in the total conception of the Platonic State
the wonderfully great hieroglyph of a profound and
eternally to be interpreted esoteric doctrine of the
connection between State and Genius. What we be-
lieved we could divine of this cryptograph we have
said in this preface.



The Greek Woman

(Fragment, 1871)



Just as Plato from disguises and obscurities brought
to light the innermost purpose of the State, so also
he conceived the chief cause of the position of the
Hellenic Woman with regard to the State ; in both
cases he saw in what existed around him the image
of the ideas manifested to him, and of these ideas
of course the actual was only a hazy picture and
phantasmagoria. He who according to the usual
custom considers the position of the Hellenic Woman
to be altogether unworthy and repugnant to human-
ity, must also turn with this reproach against the
Platonic conception of this position ; for, as it were,
the existing forms were only precisely set forth in
this latter conception. Here therefore our question
repeats itself: should not the nature and the position"'
of the Hellenic Woman have a necessary relation to
the goals of the Hellenic Will ? _j

Of course there is one side of the Platonic con-
ception of woman, which stands in abrupt contrast
with Hellenic custom : Plato gives to woman a full
share in the rights, knowledge and duties of man,
and considers woman only as the weaker sex, in
that she will not achieve remarkable success in all
things, without however disputing this sex's title to
all those things. We must not attach more value toj
this strange notion than to the expulsion of the artist
out of the ideal State ; these are side-lines daringly



22 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

mis-drawn, aberrations as it were of the hand other-
wise so sure and of the so calmly contemplating
eye which at times under the influence of the de-
ceased master becomes dim and dejected ; in this
mood he exaggerates the master's paradoxes and
in the abundance of his love gives himself satisfac-
tion by very eccentrically intensifying the latter's
doctrines even to foolhardiness.

The most significant word however that Plato as
a Greek could say on the relation of woman to the
State, was that so objectionable demand, that in the
perfect State, the Family was to cease. At present let
us take no account of his abolishing even marriage,
in order to carry out this demand fully, and of his
substituting solemn nuptials arranged by order of
the State, between the bravest men and the noblest
women, for the attainment of beautiful offspring.
In that principal proposition however he has in-
dicated most distinctly — indeed too distinctly, offen-
sively distinctly — an important preparatory step of
the Hellenic Will towards the procreation of the
genius. But in the customs of the Hellenic people
the claim of the family on man and child was
extremely limited : the man lived in the State, the
child grew up for the State and was guided by the
hand of the State. The Greek Will took care that
the need of culture could not be satisfied in the
seclusion of a small circle. From the State the
individual has to receive everything in order to
return everything to the State. Woman accords
ingly means to the State, what sleep does tomaii^
In her nature lies the healing power, which replaces
that which has been used up, the beneficial rest in



THE GREEK WOMAN 23

which everything immoderate confines itself, the
eternal Same, by which the excessive and the surplus
regulate themselves. In her the future generation
dreams. Woman is more closely related to Nature
than man and in all her essentials she remains ever
herself. Culture is with her always something ex-
ternal, a something which does not touch the kernel
that is eternally faithful to Nature, therefore the
culture of woman might well appear to the Athenian
as something indifferent, yea — if one only wanted to
conjure it up in one's mind, as something ridiculous.
He who at once feels himself compelled from that
to infer the position of women among the Greeks as
unworthy and all too cruel, should not indeed take
as his criterion the " culture " of modern woman and
her claims, against which it is sufficient just to point
out the Olympian women together with Penelope,
Antigone, Elektra. Of course it is true that these
are ideal figures, but who would be able to create
such ideals out of the present world ? — Further in-
deed is to be considered what sons these women
have borne, and what women they must have been
to have given birth to such sons ! The Hellenic
woman as mother had to live in obscurity, because
the political instinct together with its highest aim
demanded it. She had to vegetate like a plant, in
the narrow circle, as a symbol of the Epicurean
wisdom \a.Q(. /3t(ocras. Again, in more recent times,
with the complete disintegration of the principle of
the State, she had to step in as helper ; the family
as a makeshift for the State is her work ; and in this
sense the artistic aim of the State had to abase
itself to the level of a domestic art. Thereby it has



24 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

been brought about, that the passion of love, as the

one realm wholly accessible to women, regulates our

art to the very core. Similarly, home-education

considers itself so to speak as the only natural one

and suffers State-education only as a questionable

infringement upon the right of home-education : all

this is right as far as the modern State only is

concerned. — With that the nature of woman withal

remains unaltered, but her power is, according to

the position which the State takes up with regard

to women, a different one. Women have indeed

really the power to make good to a certain extent

the deficiencies of the State — ever faithful to their

nature, which I have compared to sleep. In Greek

antiquity they held that position, which the most

supreme will of the State assigned to them : for

that reason they have been glorified as never since.

The goddesses of Greek mythology are their images :

the Pythia and the Sibyl, as well as the Socratic

Diotima are the priestesses out of whom divine

wisdom speaks. Now one understands why the

proud resignation of the Spartan woman at the

news of her son's death in battle can be no fable.

Woman in relation to the State felt herself in her

proper position, therefore she had more dignity than

woman has ever had since. Plato who through

abolishing family and marriage still intensifies the

position of woman, feels now so much reverence

towards them, that oddly enough he is misled by a

subsequent statement of their equality with man, to

abolish again the order of rank which is their due :

the highest triumph of the woman of antiquity, to

have seduced even the wisest !



THE GREEK WOMAN 25

As long as the State is still in an embryonic con-
dition woman as mother preponderates and deter-
mines the grade and the manifestations of Culture :
in the same way as woman is destined to comple-
ment the disorganised State. What Tacitus says of
German women : inesse quin etiam sanctum aliquid
etprovidum putant,nec aut consilia earum aspernantur
aut responsa neglegunt, applies on the whole to all
nations not yet arrived at the real State. In such
stages one feels only the more strongly that which
at all times becomes again manifest, that the instincts
of woman as the bulwark of the future generation
are invincible and that in her care for the preser-
vation of the species Nature speaks out of these
instincts very distinctly. How far this divining
power reaches is determined, it seems, by the greater
or lesser consolidation of the State : in disorderly
and more arbitrary conditions, where the whim or
the passion of the individual man carries along with
itself whole tribes, then woman suddenly comes for-
ward as the warning prophetess. But in Greece too
there was a never slumbering care that the terribly
overcharged political instinct might splinter into
dust and atoms the little political organisms before
they attained their goals in any way. Here the
• Hellenic Will created for itself ever new imple-
ments by means of which it spoke, adjusting, moder-
ating, warning : above all it is in the Pythia, that
the power of woman to compensate the State mani-
fested itself so clearly, as it has never done since.
That a people split up thus into small tribes and
municipalities, was yet at bottom whole and was
performing the task of its nature within its faction.



26 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

was assured by that wonderful phenomenon the
Pythia and the Delphian oracle : for always, as long
as Hellenism created its great works of art, it spoke
out of one mouth and as one Pythia. We cannot
hold back the portentous discernment that to the
Will individuation means much suffering, and that in
order to reach those individuals It needs an enor-
mous step-ladder of individuals. It is true our brains
reel with the consideration whether the Will in order
to arrive at Art, has perhaps effused Itself out into
these worlds, stars, bodies, and atoms : at least it
ought to become clear to us then, that Art is not
necessary for the individuals, but for the Will itself:
a sublime outlook at which we shall be permitted to
glance once more from another position.



On Music and Words

(Fragment, 1871)



What we here have asserted of the relationship
between language and music must be valid too, for
equal reasons concerning the relationship of Mime
to Music. The Mime too, as the intensified sym-
bolism of man's gestures, is, measured by the eternal
significance of music, only a simile, which brings
into expression the innermost secret of music but
very superficially, namely on the substratum of the
passionately moved human body. But if we include
language also in the category of bodily symbolism,
and compare the drama, according to the canon
advanced, with music, then I venture to think, a
proposition of Schopenhauer will come into the
clearest light, to which reference must be made again
later on. " It might be admissible, although a
purely musical mind does not demand it, to join
and adapt words or even a clearly represented
action to the pure language of tones, although the
latter, being self-sufficient, needs no help ; so that
our perceiving and reflecting intellect, which does
not like to be quite idle, may meanwhile have light
and analogous occupation also. By this concession
to the intellect man's attention adheres even more
closely to music, by this at the same time, too, is
placed underneath that which the tones indicate in
their general metaphorless language of the heart, a
visible picture, as it were a schema, as an example
illustrating a general idea . . . indeed such things will

29



30 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

even heighten the effect of music." (Schopenhauer,
Parerga, II., "On the Metaphysics of the Beauti-
ful and ^Esthetics," § 224.) If we disregard the
naturalistic external motivation according to which
our perceiving and reflecting intellect does not like
to be quite idle when listening to music, and atten-
tion led by the hand of an obvious action follows
better — then the drama in relation to music has been
characterised by Schopenhauer for the best reasons
as a schema, as an example illustrating a general
idea : and when he adds " indeed such things will
even heighten the effect of music " then the enor-
mous universality and originality of vocal music, of
the connection of tone with metaphor and idea
guarantee the correctness of this utterance. The
music of every people begins in closest connection
with lyricism and long before absolute music can be
thought of, the music of a people in that connection
passes through the most important stages of develop-
ment. If we understand this primal lyricism of a
people, as indeed we must, to be an imitation of
the artistic typifying Nature, then as the original
prototype of that union of music and lyricism must
be regarded : the duality in the essence of language,
already typified by Nature. Now, after discussing
the relation of music to metaphor we will fathom
deeper this essence of language.

In the multiplicity of languages the fact at once
manifests itself, that word and thing do not neces-
sarily coincide with one another completely, but that
the word is a symbol. But what does the word sym-
bolise ? Most certainly only conceptions, be these
now conscious ones or as in the greater number of



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 3 1

cases, unconscious ; for how should a word-symbol
correspond to that innermost nature of which we
and the world are images? Only as conceptions
we know that kernel, only in its metaphorical ex-
pressions are we familiar with it ; beyond that point
there is nowhere a direct bridge which could lead
us to it. The whole life of impulses, too, the play
of feelings, sensations, emotions, volitions, is known
to us — as I am forced to insert here in opposition to
Schopenhauer — after a most rigid self-examination,
not according to its essence but merely as concep-
tion ; and we may well be permitted to say, that
even Schopenhauer's " Will " is nothing else but the
most general phenomenal form of a Something
otherwise absolutely indecipherable. If therefore
we must acquiesce in the rigid necessity of getting
nowhere beyond the conceptions we can neverthe-
less again distinguish two main species within their
realm. The one species manifest themselves to us
as pleasure-and-displeasure-sensations and accom-
pany all other conceptions as a never-lacking funda-
mental basis. This most general manifestation, out
of which and by which alone we understand all
Becoming and all Willing and for which we will
retain the name " Will " has now too in language its
own symbolic sphere : and in truth this sphere is
equally fundamental to the language, as that mani-
festation is fundamental to all other conceptions. All
degrees of pleasure and displeasure— expressions of
one primal cause unfathomable to us — symbolise
themselves in the tone of the speaker: whereas all
the other conceptions are indicated by the gesture-
symbolism of the speaker. In so far as that primal



32 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

cause is the same in all men, the tonal subsoil is also
the common one, comprehensible beyond the differ-
ence of language. Out of it now develops the more
arbitrary gesture-symbolism which is not wholly
adequate for its basis : and with which begins the
diversity of languages, whose multiplicity we are
permitted to consider — to use a simile — as a strophic
text to that primal melody of the pleasure-and-
displeasure-language. The whole realm of the con-
sonantal and vocal we believe we may reckon only
under gesture-symbolism : consonants and vowels
without that fundamental tone which is necessary
above all else, are nothing but positions of the
organs of speech, in short, gestures — ; as soon as we
imagine the word proceeding out of the mouth of
man, then first of all the root of the word, and the
basis of that gesture-symbolism, the tonal subsoil,
the echo of the pleasure-and-displeasure-sensations
originate. As our whole corporeality stands in
relation to that original phenomenon, the "Will,"
so the word built out of its consonants and vowels
stands in relation to its tonal basis.

This original phenomenon, the "Will," with its
scale of pleasure-and-displeasure-sensations attains
in the development of music an ever more adequate
symbolic expression : and to this historical process
the continuous effort of lyric poetry runs parallel, the
effort to transcribe music into metaphors : exactly
as this double-phenomenon, according to the just
completed disquisition, lies typified in language.

He who has followed us into these difficult con-
templations readily, attentively, and with some
imagination — and with kind indulgence where the



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 33

expression has been too scanty or too unconditional
— will now have the advantage with us, of laying
before himself more seriously and answering more
deeply than is usually the case some stirring points
of controversy of present-day aesthetics and still
more of contemporary artists. Let us think now,
after all our assumptions, what an undertaking it
must be, to set music to a poem ; i.e., to illustrate
a poem by music, in order to help music thereby
to obtain a language of ideas. What a perverted
world ! A task that appears to my mind like that
of a son wanting to create his father ! Music can
create metaphors out of itself, which will always
however be but schemata, instances as it were of
her intrinsic general contents. But how should the
metaphor, the conception, create music out of itself !
Much less could the idea, or, as one has said, the
" poetical idea " do this. As certainly as a bridge
leads out of the mysterious castle of the musician
into the free land of the metaphors — and the lyric
poet steps across it — as certainly is it impossible to
go the contrary way, although some are said to exist
who fancy they have done so. One might people
the air with the phantasy of a Raphael, one might
see St. Cecilia, as he does, listening enraptured to the
harmonies of the choirs of angels — no tone issues
from this world apparently lost in music : even if
we imagined that that harmony in reality, as by
a miracle, began to sound for us, whither would
Cecilia, Paul and Magdalena disappear from us,
whither even the singing choir of angels ! We should
at once cease to be Raphael : and as in that picture
the earthly instruments lie shattered on the ground,

3



34 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

SO our painter's vision, defeated by the higher, would
fade and die away. — How nevertheless could the
miracle happen ? How should the Apollonian world
of the eye quite engrossed in contemplation be able
to create out of itself the tone, which on the contrary
symbolises a sphere which is excluded and con-
quered just by that very Apollonian absorption in
Appearance? The delight at Appearance cannot
raiseout of itself the pleasure at Non-appearance; the
delight of perceiving is delight only by the fact that
nothing reminds us of a sphere in which individua-
tion is broken and abolished. If we have character-
ised at all correctly the Apollonian in opposition to
the Dionysean, then the thought which attributes
to the metaphor, the idea, the appearance, in some
way the power of producing out of itself the tone,
must appear to us strangely wrong. We will not
be referred, in order to be refuted, to the musician
who writes music to existing lyric poems ; for after
all that has been said we shall be compelled to
assert that the relationship between the lyric poem
and its setting must in any case be a different one
from that between a father and his child. Then
what exactly ?

Here now we may be met on the ground of a
favourite aesthetic notion with the proposition, " It
is not the poem which gives birth to the setting but
the sentiment created by the poem." I do not agree
with that ; the more subtle or powerful stirring-up
of that pleasure-and-displeasure-subsoil is in the
realm of productive art the element which is in-
artistic in itself; indeed only its total exclusion
makes the complete self-absorption and disinterested



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 35

perception of the artist possible. Here perhaps one
might retaliate that I myself just now predicated
about the "Will," that in music "Will" came to an
ever more adequate symbolic expression. My
answer, condensed into an aesthetic axiom, is this :
the Will is the object of music but not the origin of it,
that is the Will in its very greatest universality, as
the most original manifestation, under which is to
be understood all Becoming. That, which we call
feeling, is with regard to this Will already permeat-
ed and saturated with conscious and unconscious
conceptions and is therefore no longer directly the
object of music ; it is unthinkable then that these
feelings should be able to create music out of them-
selves. Take for instance the feelings of love, fear
and hope : music can no longer do anything with
them in a direct way, every one of them is already
so filled with conceptions. On the contrary these
feelings can serve to symbolise music, as the lyric
poet does who translates for himself into the simile-
world of feelings that conceptually and metaphori-
cally unapproachable realm of the Will, the proper
content and object of music. The lyric poet re-
sembles all those hearers of music who are conscious
of an ejfect of music on their emotions ; the distant
and removed power of music appeals, with them,
to an intermediate realm which gives to them as it
were a foretaste, a symbolic preliminary conception
of music proper, it appeals to the intermediate
realm of the emotions. One might be permitted
to say about them, with respect to the Will, the
only object of music, that they bear the same rela-
tion to this Will, as the analogous morning-dream.



36 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

according to Schopenhauer's theory, bears to the
dream proper. To all those, however, who are un-
able to get at music except with their emotions,
is to be said, that they will ever remain in the
entrance-hall, and will never have access to the
sanctuary of music : which, as I said, emotion can-
not show but only symbolise.

With regard however to the origin of music, I
have already explained that that can never lie in
the Will, but must rather rest in the lap of that
force, which under the form of the " Will " creates
out of itself a visionary world : the origin of music
lies beyond all individuation, a proposition, which
after our discussion on the Dionyseanis self-evident.
At this point I take the liberty of settmg forth again
comprehensively side by side those decisive proposi-
tions which the antithesis of the Dionysean and Apol-
lonian dealt with has compelled us to enunciate :

The " Will," as the most original manifestation,
is the object of music : in this sense music can be
called imitation of Nature, but of Nature in its
most general form. —

The "Will" itself and the feelings — manifesta-
tions of the Will already permeated with concep-
tions — are wholly incapable of creating music out
of themselves, just as on the other hand it is utterly
denied to music to represent feelings, or to have
feelings as its object, while Will is its only object. —

He who carries away feelings as effects of music
has within them as it were a symbolic intermediate
realm, which can give him a foretaste of music, but
excludes him at the same time from her innermost
sanctuaries. —



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 37

The lyric poet interprets music to himself through
the symbolic world of emotions, whereas he himself,
in the calm of the Apollonian contemplation, is
exempted from those emotions.—

When, therefore, the musician writes a setting to a
lyric poem he is moved as musician neither through
the images nor through the emotional language in
the text; but a musical inspiration coming from
quite a different sphere chooses for itself that song-
text as allegorical expression. There cannot there-
fore be any question as to a necessary relation be-
tween poem and music ; for the two worlds brought
here into connection are too strange to one another
to enter into more than a superficial alliance ; the
song-text is just a symbol and stands to music in
the same relation as the Egyptian hieroglyph of
bravery did to the brave warrior himself During
the highest revelations of music we even feel in-
voluntarily the crudeness of every figurative effort
and of every emotion dragged in for purposes of
analogy ; for example, the last quartets of Bee-
thoven quite put to shame all illustration and the
entire realm of empiric reality. The .symbol, in face
of the god really revealing himself, has no longer
any meaning ; moreover it appears as an offensive
superficiality.

One must not think any the worse of us for con-
sidering from this point of view one item so that
we may speak about it without reserve, namely the
last movement of Beethoverfs Ninth Symphony, a
movement which is unprecedented and unanalys-
able in its charms. To the dithyrambic world-
redeeming exultation of this music Schiller's poem,



38 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

"To Joy," is wholly incongruous, yea, like cold moon-
light, pales beside that sea of flame. Who would
rob me of this sure feeling ? Yea, who would be able
to dispute that that feeling during the hearing of
this music does not find expression in a scream only
because we, wholly impotent through music for
metaphor and word, already hear nothing at all from.
Schiller's poem. All that noble sublimity, yea the
grandeur of Schiller's verses has, beside the truly
naive-innocent folk -melody of joy, a disturbing,
troubling, even crude and offensive effect; only the
ever fuller development of the choir's song and the
masses of the orchestra preventing us from hearing
them, keep from us that sensation of incongruity.
What therefore shall we think of that awful aesthetic
superstition that Beethoven himself made a solemn
statement as to his belief in the limits of absolute
music, in that fourth movement of the Ninth Sym-
phony, yea that he as it were with it unlocked the
portals of a new art, within which music had been
enabled to represent even metaphor and idea and
whereby music had been opened to the " conscious
mind." And what does Beethoven himself tell us
when he has choir-song introduced by a recitative ?
" Alas friends, let us intonate not these tones but
more pleasing and joyous ones ! " More pleasing
and joyous ones ! For that he needed the convinc-
ing tone of the human voice, for that he needed the
music of innocence in the folk-song. Not the word,
but the " more pleasing " sound, not the idea but
the most heartfelt joyful tone was chosen by the
sublime master in his longing for the most soul-
thrilling ensemble of his orchestra. And how could



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 39

one misunderstand him ! Rather may the same be
said of this movement as Richard Wagner says of
the great "^issa Solemnis^ which he calls " a pure
symphonic work of the most genuine Beethoven -
spirit " (Beethoven, p. 42). " The voices are treated
here quite in the sense of human instruments, in
which sense Schopenhauer quite rightly wanted
these human voices to be considered ; the text
underlying them is understood by us in these great
Church compositions, not in its conceptual meaning,
but it serves in the sense of the musical work of
art, merely as material for vocal music and does not
stand to our musically determined sensation in a
disturbing position simply because it does not in-
cite in us any rational conceptions but, as its eccle-
siastical character conditions too, only touches us
with the impression of well-known symbolic creeds."
Besides I do not doubt .that Beethoven, had he
written the Tenth Symphony — of which drafts are
still extant — would have composed just the Tenth
Symphony.

Let us now approach, after these preparations, the
discussion of the opera, so as to be able to proceed
afterwards from the opera to its counterpart in the
Greek tragedy. What we had to observe in the last
movement of the Ninth, i.e., on the highest level
of modern music-development, viz., that the word-
content goes down unheard in the general sea of
sound, is nothing isolated and peculiar, but the gene-
ral and eternally valid norm in the vocal music of
all times, the norm which alone is adequate to the
origin of lyric song. The man in a state of Dionys-
ean excitement has a listener just as little as the



40 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

orgiastic crowd, a listener to whom he might have
something to communicate, a listener as the epic nar-
rator and generally speaking the Apollonian artist,
to be sure, presupposes. It is rather in the nature of
the Dionysean art, that it has no consideration for
the listener : the inspired servant of Dionysos is, as
I said in a former place, understood only by his com-
peers. But if we now imagine a listener at those
endemic outbursts of Dionysean excitement then
we shall have to prophesy for him a fate similar to
that which Pentheus the discovered eavesdropper
suffered, namely, to be torn to pieces by the Maenads.
The lyric musician sings "as the bird sings,"* alone,
out of innermost compulsion ; when the listener
comes to him with a demand he must become dumb.
Therefore it would be altogether unnatural to ask
from the lyric musician that one should also under-
stand the text-words of his song, unnatural because
here a demand is made by the listener, who has no
right at all during the lyric outburst to claim any-
thing. Now with the poetry of the great ancient
lyric poets in your hand, put the question honestly
to yourself whether they can have even thought of
making themselves clear to the mass of the people
standing around and listening, clear with their world
of metaphors and thoughts ; answer this serious
question with a look at Pindar and the .^schylian
choir songs. These most daring and obscure in-



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 4 1

tricacies of thought, this whirl of metaphors, ever
impetuously reproducing itself, this oracular tone of
the whole, which we, without the diversion of music
and orchestration, so often cannot penetrate even
with the closest attention — was this whole world of
miracles transparent as glass to the Greek crowd,
yea, a metaphorical-conceptual interpretation of
music? And with such mysteries of thought as
are to be found in Pindar do you think the wonder-
ful poet could have wished to elucidate the music
already strikingly distinct? Should we here not
be forced to an insight into the very nature of the
lyricist — the artistic man, who to himself must in-
terpret music through the symbolism of metaphors
and emotions, but who has nothing to communicate
to the listener ; an artist who, in complete aloof-
ness, even forgets those who stand eagerly listening
near him. And as the lyricist his hymns, so the
people sing the folk-song, for themselves, out of in-
most impulse, unconcerned whether the word is com-
prehensible to him who does not join in the song.
Let us think of our own experiences in the realm
of higher art-music : what did we understand of the
text of a Mass of Palestrina, of a Cantata of Bach,
of an Oratorio of Handel, if we ourselves perhaps
did not join in singing ? Only for him who joins in
singing do lyric poetry and vocal music exist ; the
listener stands before it as before absolute music.

But now the opera begins, according to the clear-
est testimonies, with the demand of the listener to
tmderstand the word.

What ? The listener demands ? The word is to
be understood?



42 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

But to bring music into the service of a series of
metaphors and conceptions, to use it as a means to
an end, to the strengthening and elucidation of such
conceptions and metaphors — such a peculiar pre-
sumption as is found in the concept of an "opera,"
reminds me of that ridiculous person who endeavours
to lift himself up into the air with his own arms;
that which this fool and which the opera accord-
ing to that idea attempt are absolute impossi-
bilities. That idea of the opera does not demand
perhaps an abuse from music but — as I said —
an impossibility. Music never can become a
means ; one may push, screw, torture it ; as tone, as
roll of the drum, in its crudest and simplest stages,
it still defeats poetry and abases the latter to its
reflection. The opera as a species of art according
to that concept is therefore not only an aber-
ration of music, but an erroneous conception of
aesthetics. If I herewith, after all, justify the nature
of the opera for aesthetics, I am of course far from
justifying at the same time bad opera music or bad
opera-verses. The worst music can still mean, as
compared with the best poetry, the Dionysean
world-subsoil, and the worst poetry can be mirror,
image and reflection of this subsoil, if together with
the best music : as certainly, namely, as the single
tone against the metaphor is already Dionysean,
and the single metaphor together with idea and
word against music is already Apollonian. Yea,
even bad music together with bad poetry can still
inform as to the nature of music and poesy.

When therefore Schopenhauer felt Bellini's
'' Norma," for example, as the fulfilment of tragedy.



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 43

with regard to that opera's music and poetry, then he,
in Dionysean-Apollonian emotion and self-forgetful-
ness,was quite entitled to do so, because he perceived
music and poetry in their most general, as it were,
philosophical value, as music and poetry : but with
that judgment he showed a poorly educated taste, —
for good taste always has historical perspective. To
us, who intentionally in this investigation avoid any
question of the historic value of an art-phenomenon
and endeavour to focus only the phenomenon itself,
in its unaltered eternal meaning, and consequently
in its highest type, too, — to us the art-species of the
"opera" seems to be justified as much as the folk-
song, in so far as we find in both that union of the
Dionysean and Apollonian and are permitted to
assume for the opera — namely for the highest type
of the opera — an origin analogous to that of the
folk-song. Only in so far as the opera historically
known to us has a completely different origin from
that of the folk-song do we reject this "opera,"
which stands in the same relation to that generic
notion just defended by us, as the marionette does
to a living human being. It is certain, music never
can become a means in the service of the text,
but must always defeat the text, yet music must
become bad when the composer interrupts every
Dionysean force rising within himself by an anxious
regard for the words and gestures of his marion-
ettes. If the poet of the opera-text has offered him
nothing more than the usual schematised figures
with their Egyptian regularity, then the freer, more
unconditional, more Dionysean is the development
of the music ; and the more she despises all dra-



44 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

matic requirements, so much the higher will be the
value of the opera. In this sense it is true the opera
is, at its best, good music, and nothing but music :
whereas the jugglery performed at the same time
is, as it were, only a fantastic disguise of the orches-
tra, above all, of the most important instruments
the orchestra has : the singers ; and from this jug-
glery the judicious listener turns away laughing. If
the mass is diverted by this very jugglery and only
permits the music with it, then the mob fares as all
those do who value the frame of a good picture
higher than the picture itself. Who treats such
naive aberrations with a serious or even pathetic
reproach ?

But what will the opera mean as " dramatic "
music, in its possibly farthest distance from pure
music, efficient in itself, and purely Dionysean ?
Let us imagine a passionate drama full of inci-
dents which carries away the spectator, and which
is already sure of success by its plot : what will
" dramatic " music be able to add, if it does not take
away something ? Firstly, it will take away much :
for in every moment where for once the Dionysean
power of music strikes the listener, the eye is dimmed
that sees the action, the eye that became absorbed
in the individuals appearing before it : the listener
now forgets the drama and becomes alive again to it
only when the Dionysean spell over him has been
broken. In so far, however, as music makes the
listener forget the drama, it is not yet " dramatic "
music : but what kind of music is that which is not
allowed to exercise any Dionysean power over the
listener? And how is it possible? It is possible



ON MUSIC AND WORDS 45

as purely conventional symbolism, out of which con-
vention has sucked all natural strength : as music
which has diminished to symbols of remembrance :
and its effect aims at reminding the spectator of
something, which at the sight of the drama must not
escape him lest he should misunderstand it : as a
trumpet signal is an invitation for the horse to trot.
Lastly, before the drama commenced and in inter-
ludes or during tedious passages, doubtful as to
dramatic effect, yea, even in its highest moments,
there would still be permitted another species of
remembrance-music, no longer purely conventional,
namely emotional-music, music, as a stimulant to
dull or wearied nerves. I am able to distinguish
in the so-called dramatic music these two elements
only : a conventional rhetoric and remembrance-
music, and a sensational-music with an effect essen-
tially physical : and thus it vacillates between the
noise of the drum and the signal-horn, like the mood
of the warrior who goes into the battle. But now
the mind, regaling itself on pure music and educated
through comparison, demands a masqueradeiox those
two wrong tendencies of music; "Remembrance"
and "Emotion" are to be played, but in good music,
which must be in itself enjoyable, yea, valuable ;
what despair for the dramatic musician, who must
mask the big drum by good music, which, however,
must nevertheless have no purely musical, but only
a stimulating effect ! And now comes the great
Philistine public nodding its thousand heads and
enjoys this " dramatic music" which is ever ashamed
of itself, enjoys it to the very last morsel, without
perceiving anything of its shame and embarrass-



46 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

ment. Rather the public feels its skin agreeably
tickled, for indeed homage is being rendered in
all forms and ways to the public ! To the pleasure-
hunting, dull-eyed sensualist, who needs excite-
ment, to the conceited "educated person" who
has accustomed himself to good drama and good
music as to good food, without after all making
much out of it, to the forgetful and absent-minded
egoist, who must be led back to the work of art with
force and with signal-horns because selfish plans
continually pass through his mind aiming at gain
or pleasure. Woe-begone dramatic musicians !
" Draw near and view your Patrons' faces ! The
half are coarse, the half are cold." " Why should you
rack, poor foolish Bards, for ends like these the gra-
cious Muses?"* And that the muses are tormented,
even tortured and flayed, these veracious miserable
ones do not themselves deny !

We had assumed a passionate drama, carrying
away the spectator, which even without music would
be sure of its effect. I fear that that in it which is
" poetry" and not action proper will stand in relation
to true poetry as dramatic music to music in general:
it will be remembrance- and emotional-poetry.
Poetry will serve as a means, in order to recall in
a conventional fashion feelings and passions, the
expression of which has been found by real poets
and has become celebrated, yea, normal with them.
Further, this poetry will be expected in dangerous
moments to assist the proper "action," — whether
a criminalistic horror-story or an exhibition of




ON MUSIC AND WORDS 47

witchery mad with shifting the scenes, — and to
spread a covering veil over the crudeness of the
action itself. Shamefully conscious that the poetry
is only masquerade which cannot bear the light of
day, such a "dramatic" rime-jingle clamours now
for " dramatic " music, as on the other hand again
the poetaster of such dramas is met after one-fourth
of the way by the dramatic musician with his talent
for the drum and the signal-horn and his shyness of
genuine music, trusting in itself and self-sufficient.
And now they see one another ; and these Apol-
lonian and Dionysean caricatures, this par nobile
fratrum, embrace one another !



Homer's Contest

Preface to an Unwritten Book (1872)



\ When one speaks of '' humanity " the notion lies

/ at the bottom, that humanity is that which separates

I and distinguishes man from Nature. But such a

I distinction does not in reality exist : the " natural "

I qualities and the properly called " human " ones

I have grown up inseparably together? Man in his

highest and noblest capacities is Nature and bears

in himself her awful twofold character. His abilities

generally considered dreadful and inhuman are

perhaps indeed the fertile soil, out of which alone

can grow forth all humanity in emotions, actions

and works.

Thus the Greeks, the most humane men of ancient
times, have in themselves a trait of cruelty, of tiger-
like pleasure in destruction : a trait, which in the
grotesquely magnified image of the Hellene, in
Alexander the Great, is very plainly visible, which,
however, in their whole history, as well as in their
mythology, must terrify us who meet them with
the emasculate idea of modern humanity. When
Alexander has the feet of Batis, the brave defender
of Gaza, bored through, and binds the living body to
his chariot in order to drag him about exposed to
the scorn of his soldiers, that is a sickening cari-
cature of Achilles, who at night ill-uses Hector's
corpse by a similar trailing ; but even this trait has
for us something offensive, something which inspires



52 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

horror. It gives us a peep into the abysses of hatred.
With the same sensation perhaps we stand before
the bloody and insatiable self-laceration of two
Greek parties, as for example in the Corcyrean
revolution. When the victor, in a fight of the cities,
according to the law of warfare, executes the whole
male population and sells all the women and children
into slavery, we see, in the sanction of such a law,
that the Greek deemed it a positive necessity to
allow his hatred to break forth unimpeded ; in such
moments the compressed and swollen feeling re-
lieved itself; the tiger bounded forth, a voluptuous
cruelty shone out of his fearful eye. Why had the
Greek sculptor to represent again and again war and
fights in innumerable repetitions, extended human
bodies whose sinews are tightened through hatred
or through the recklessness of triumph, fighters
wounded and writhing with pain, or the dying with
the last rattle in their throat ? Why did the whole
Greek world exult in the fighting scenes of the
" Iliad "? I am afraid, we do not understand them
enough in "Greek fashion," and that we should
even shudder, if for once we did understand them
thus.

But what lies, as the mother-womb of the Hellenic,
behind the Homeric world ? In the latter, by the
extremely artistic definiteness, and the calm and
purity of the lines we are already lifted far above
the purely material amalgamation : its colours, by
an artistic deception, appear lighter, milder, warmer;
its men, in this coloured, warm illumination, appear
better and more sympathetic — but where do we look,
if, no longer guided and protected by Homer's hand.



homer's contest S3

we step backwards into the pre- Homeric world ?
Only into night and horror, into the products of a
fancy accustomed to the horrible. What earthly
existence is reflected in the loathsome-awful theo-
gonian lore : a life swayed only by the children of the
night, strife, amorous desires, deception, age and
death. Let us imagine the suffocating atmosphere
of Hesiod's poem, still thickened and darkened and
without all the mitigations and purifications, which
poured over Hellas from Delphi and the numerous
seats of the gods ! If we mix this thickened Boeotian
air with the grim voluptuousness of the Etruscans,
then such a reality would extort from us a world of
myths within which Uranos, Kronos and Zeus and
the struggles of the Titans would appear as a relief.
Combat in this brooding atmosphere is salvation and
safety ; the cruelty of victory is the summit of life's
glories. And just as in truth the idea of Greek law
has developed from murder and expiation of murder,
so also nobler Civilisation takes her first wreath of
victory from the altar of the expiation of murder.
Behind that bloody age stretches a wave-furrow deep
into Hellenic history. The names of Orpheus, of
Musaeus, and their cults indicate to what conse-
quences the uninterrupted sight of a world of warfare
and cruelty led — to the loathing of existence, to the
conception of this existence as a punishment to be
borne to the end, to the belief in the identity of ex-
istence and indebtedness. But these particular con-
clusions are not specifically Hellenic ; through them
Greece comes into contact with India and the Orient
generally. The Hellenic genius had ready yet an-
other answer to the question : what does a life of



54 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

fighting and of victory mean ? and gives this answer
in the whole breadth of Greek history.

In order to understand the latter we must start
from the fact that the Greek genius admitted the
existing fearful impulse, and deemed it justified ;
whereas in the Orphic phase of thought was con-
tained the belief that life with such an impulse as
its root would not be worth living. Strife and the
pleasure of victory were acknowledged ; and nothing
separates the Greek world more from ours than the
colouring, derived hence, of some ethical ideas, e.g., of
Eris and ol Envy.

When the traveller Pausanius during his wander-
ings through Greece visited the Helicon, a very old
copy of the first didactic poem of the Greeks, " The
Works and Days " of Hesiod, was shown to him, in-
scribed upon plates of lead and severely damaged
by time and weather. However he recognised this
much, that, unlike the usual copies, it had not at its
head that little hymnus on Zeus, but began at once
with the declaration : " Two Eris-goddesses are on
earth." This is one of the most noteworthy Hellenic
thoughts and worthy to be impressed on the new-
comer immediately at the entrance-gate of Greek
ethics. " One would like to praise the one Eris, just
as much as to blame the other, if one uses one's
reason. For these two goddesses have quite different
dispositions. For the one, the cruel one, furthers the
evil war and feud ! No mortal likes her, but under
the yoke of need one pays honour to the burdensome
Eris, according to the decree of the immortals. She,
as the elder, gave birth to black night. Zeus the high-
ruling one, however, placed the other Eris upon the



homer's contest 55

roots of the earth and among men as a much better
one. She urges even the unskilled man to work, and
if one who lacks property beholds another who is
rich, then he hastens to sow in similar fashion and to
plant and to put his house in order ; the neighbour
vies with the neighbour who strives after fortune.
Good is this Eris to men. The potter also has a
grudge against the potter, and the carpenter against
the carpenter ; the beggar envies the beggar, and the
singer the singer."

The two last verses which treat of the odium figu-
linum appear to our scholars to be incomprehensible
in this place. According to their judgment the pre-
dicates : " grudge " and " envy " fit only the nature of
the evil Eris, and for this reason they do not hesitate
to designate these verses as spurious or thrown by
chance into this place. For that judgment however
a system of Ethics other than the Hellenic must have
inspired these scholars unawares ; for in these verses
to the good Eris Aristotle finds no offence. And not
only Aristotle but the whole Greek antiquity thinks
of spite and envy otherwise than we do and agrees
with Hesiod, \vho first designates as an evil one that
Eris who leads men against one another to a hostile
wEuFoTextermination, and secondly praises another
lEris'as the good one, who as jealousy, spite, envy, in-
cffeTmefi to activity but not to the action of war to
the knife but to the action o{ contest. The Greek is
envious and conceives of this quality not as a blemish,
but as the effect of a beneficent deity. What a gulf
of ethical judgment between us and him ? Because
he is envious he also feels, with every superfluity of
honour, riches, splendour and fortune, the envious



S6 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

eye of a god resting on himself, and he fears this
envy ; in this case the latter reminds him of the
transitoriness of every human lot ; he dreads his
very happiness and, sacrificing the best of it, he bows
before the divine envy. This conception does not
perhaps estrange him from his gods ; their signifi-
cance on the contrary is expressed by the thought
that with them man in whose soul jealousy is en-
kindled against every other living being, is never
allowed to venture into contest. In the fight of
Thamyris with the Muses, of Marsyas with Apollo,
in the heart-moving fate of Niobe appears the hor-
rible opposition of the two powers, who must never
fight with one another, man and god.

The greater and more sublime however a Greek
is, the brighter in him appears the ambitious flanie,
devouring everybody who runs with him on the same
track. Aristotle once made a list of such contests
on a large scale ; among them is the most striking
instance how even a dead person can still incite a
living one to consuming jealousy ; thus for example
Aristotle designates the relation between the Kolo-
phonian Xenophanes and Homer. We do not under-
stand this attack on the national hero of poetry in
all its strength, if we do not imagine, as later on also
with Plato, the root of this attack to be the ardent
desire to step into the place of the overthrown poet
and to inherit his fame. Every great Hellene hands
on the torch of the contest ; at every great virtue a
newlight is kindled. If the young Themistoclescould
not sleep at the thought of the laurels of Miltiades so
his early awakened bent released itself only in the
long emulation with Aristides in that uniquely note-



homer's contest 57

worthy, purely instinctive genius of his political
activity, which Thucydides describes. How charac-
teristic are both question and answer, when a notable
opponent of Pericles is asked, whether he or Pericles
was the better wrestler in the city, and he gives the
answer : " Even if I throw him down he denies that
he has fallen, attains his purpose and convinces those
who saw him fall."

If one wants to see that sentiment unashamed in
its naive expressions, the sentiment as to the neces-
sity of contest lest the State's welfare be threatened,
one should think of the original meaning of Ostra-
cism, as for example the Ephesians pronounced it at
the banishment of Hermodor. " Among us nobody
shall be the best; if however someone is the best, then
let him be so elsewhere and among others." Why
should not someone be the best ? Because with that
the contest would fail, and the eternal life-basis of
the Hellenic State would be endangered. Later on
Ostracism receives quite another position with regard
to the contest ; it is applied, when the danger be-
comes obvious that one of the great contesting poli-
ticians and party-leaders feels himself urged on in
the heat of the conflict towards harmful and destruc-
tive measures and dubious coups d'etat. The original
sense of this peculiar institution however is not that
of a safety-valve but that of a stimulant. The all-
excelling individual was to be removed in order that
the contest of forces might re-awaken, a thought
which is hostile to the " exclusiveness " of genius
in the modern sense but which assumes that in
the natural order of things there are always several
geniuses which incite one another to action, as much



58 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

also as they hold one another within the bounds
of moderation. That is the kernel of the Hellenic
contest-conception : it abominates autocracy, and
fears its dangers ; it desires as a preventive against
the genius — a second genius.

Every natural gift must develop itself by contest.
Thus the Hellenic national pedagogy demands,
whereas modern educators fear nothing as much as,
the unchaining of the so-called ambition. Here one
fears selfishness as the '' evil in itself" — with the ex-
ception of the Jesuits, who agree with the Ancients
and who, possibly, for that reason, are the most effi-
cient educators of our time. They seem to believe
that Selfishness, i.e., the individual element is only
the most powerful agens but that it obtains its^har-
acter as " good " and "evil" essentially from tbe.aims
towards which it strives. To the Ancients however
the aim of the agonistic education was the welfare
of the whole, of the civic society. Every Athenian
for instance was to cultivate his Ego in contest, so
far that it should be of the highest service to Athens
and should do the least harm. It was not unmea-
sured and immeasurable as modern ambition gener-
ally is; the youththoughtof the welfare of his native
town when he vied with others in running, throwing
or singing ; it was her glory that he wanted to in-
crease with his own ; it was to his town's gods that
he dedicated the wreaths which the umpires as a
mark of honour set upon his head. Every Greek
from childhood felt within himself the burning wish
to be in the contest of the towns an instrument for
the welfare of his own town ; in this Tiis selfishness
was kindled into ilame, by this his selfishness was



homer's contest 59

bridled and restricted. Tlierefore the individuals in
antiquity were freer, because their aims were nearer
and more tangible. Modern man, on the contrary,
is everywhere hampered by infinity, like the fleet-
footed Achilles in the allegory of the Eleate Zeno :
infinity impedes him, he does not even overtake the
tortoise.

But as the youths to be educated were brought
up struggling against one another, so their educators
were in turn in emulation amongst themselves. Dis-
trustfully jealous, the great musical masters, Pindar
and Simonides, stepped side by side ; in rivalry
the sophist, the higher teacher of antiquity meets
his fellow-sophist ; even the most universal kind
of instruction, through the drama, was imparted to
the people only under the form of an enormous
wrestling of the great musical and dramatic artists.
How wonderful ! " And even the artist has a grudge
against the artist ! " And the modern man dislikes
in an artist nothing so much as the personal battle-
feeling, whereas the Greek recognises the artist
only in such a personal struggle. There where the
modern suspects weakness of the work of art, the
Hellene seeks the source of his highest strength !
That, which by way of example in Plato is of special
artistic importance in his dialogues, is usually the
result of an emulation with the art of the orators,
of the sophists, of the dramatists of his time, in-
vented deliberately in order that at the end he
could say : " Behold, I can also do what my great
rivals can ; yea I can do it even better than they.
No Protagoras has composed such beautiful myths
as I, no dramatist such a spirited and fascinating



6o VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

whole as the Symposion, no orator penned such an
oration as I put up in the Georgias — and now I
reject all that together and condemn all imitative
art ! Only the contest made me a poet, a sophist,
an orator ! " What a problem unfolds itself there
before us, if we ask about the relationship between
the contest and the conception of the work of art ! —
If on the other hand we remove the contest from
Greek life, then we look at once into the pre-Homeric
abyss of horrible savagery, hatred, and pleasure in
destruction. This phenomenon alas ! shows itself
frequently when a great personality was, owing to an
enormously brilliant deed, suddenly withdrawn from
the contest and became hors de concours according
to his, and his fellow-citizens' judgment. Almost
without exception the effect is awful ; and if one
usually draws from these consequences the conclu-
sion that the Greek was unable to bear glory and
fortune, one should say more exactly that he was
unable to bear fame without further struggle, and
fortune at the end of the contest. There is no more
distinct instance than the fate of Miltiades. Placed
upon a solitary height and lifted far above every
fellow-combatant through his incomparable success
at Marathon, he feels a low thirsting for revenge
awakened within himself against a citizen of Para,
with whom he had been at enmity long ago. To
satisfy his desire he misuses reputation, the public
exchequer and civic honour and disgraces himself.
Conscious of his ill-success he falls into unworthy
machinations. He forms a clandestine and godless
connection with Timo a priestess of Demeter, and
enters at night the sacred temple, from which every



homer's contest 6 1

man was excluded. After he has leapt over the
wall and comes ever nearer the shrine of the goddess,
the dreadful horror of a panic-like terror suddenly
seizes him ; almost prostrate and unconscious he
feels himself driven back and leaping the wall once
more, he falls down paralysed and severely injured.
The siege must be raised and a disgraceful death
impresses its seal upon a brilliant heroic career, in
order to darken it for all posterity. After the battle
at Marathon the envy of the celestials has caught
him. And this divine envy breaks into flames when
it beholds man wfthout rival, without opponent, on
the solitary height of glory. He now has beside him
only the gods — and therefore he has them against
him. These however betray him into a deed of the
Hybris, and under it he collapses.

Let us well observe that just as Miltiades perishes
so the noblest Greek States perish when they, by
merit and fortune, have arrived from the racecourse
at the temple of Nike. Athens, which had de-
stroyed the independence of her allies and avenged
with severity the rebellions of her subjected foes,
Sparta, which after the battle of .^gospotamoi used
her preponderance over Hellas in a still harsher and
more cruel fashion, both these, as in the case of Milti-
ades, brought about their ruin through deeds of the
Hybris, as a proof that without envy, jealousy, and
contesting ambition the Hellenic State like the Hel-
Tenic man degenerates. He becomes bad and cruel,
thirsting for revenge, and godless ; in short, he be-
comes" pre-Homeric" — and then it needs only a
panic in order to bring about his fall and to crush
him. Sparta and Athens surrender to Persia, as



62 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Themistocles and Alcibiades have done ; they betray
Hellenism after they have given up the noblest Hel-
lenic fundamental thought, the contest, and AleJT-
ander, the coarsened copy and abbreviation of Greek
history, now invents the cosmopolitan Hellene, and
the so-called " Hellenism."

Preface to an Unwritten Book (1872)



In dear vile Germany culture now lies so decayed
in the streets, jealousy of all that is great rules so
shamelessly, and the general tumult of those who
race for " Fortune " resounds so deafeningly, that one
must have a strong faith, almost in the sense of credo
quia absurdum est, in order to hope still for a growing
Culture, and above all — in opposition to the press
with her " public opinion " — to be able to work by
public teaching. With violence must those, in whose
hearts lies the immortal care for the people, free
themselves from all the inrushing impressions of
that which is just now actual and valid, and evoke
the appearance of reckoning them indifferent things.
They must appear so, because they want to think,
and because a loathsome sight and a confused noise,
perhaps even mixed with the trumpet-flourishes of
war-glory, disturb their thinking, and above all,
because they want to believe in the German character
and because with this faith they would lose their
strength. Do not find fault with these believers if
they look from their distant aloofness and from the
heights towards their Promised Land ! They fear
those experiences, to which the kindly disposed
foreigner surrenders himself, when he lives among
the Germans, and must be surprised how little
German life corresponds to those great individuals,
works and actions, which, in his kind disposition he
5 ^5



66 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

has learned to revere as the true German character.
Where the German cannot lift himself into the
sublime he makes an impression less than the medi-
ocre. Even the celebrated German scholarship, in
which a number of the most useful domestic and
homely virtues such as faithfulness, self-restriction,
industry, moderation, cleanliness appear transposed
into a purer atmosphere and, as it were, transfigured,
is by no means the result of these virtues ; looked
at closely, the motive urging to unlimited knowledge
appears in Germany much more like a defect, a gap,
than an abundance of forces, it looks almost like the
consequence of a needy formless atrophied life and
even like a flight from the moral narrow-mindedness
and maKce to which the German without such diver-
sions is subjected, and which also in spite of that
scholarship, yea still within scholarship itself, often
break forth. As the true virtuosi of philistinism
the Germans are at home in narrowness of life,
discerning and judging ; if any one will carry them
above themselves into the sublime, then they make
themselves heavy as lead, and as such lead-weights
they hang to their truly great men, in order to pull
them down out of the ether to the level of their
own necessitous indigence. Perhaps this Philistine
homeliness may be only the degeneration of a
genuine German virtue — a profound submersion into
the detail, the minute, the nearest and into the
mysteries of the individual — but this virtue grown
mouldy is now worse than the most open vice, espe-
cially since one has now become conscious, with
gladness of the heart, of this quality, even to lite-
rary self-glorification. Now the "Educated" among



SCHOPENHAUER'S PHILOSOPHY 67

the proverbially so cultured Germans and the "Philis-
tines" among the, as everybody knows, so uncul-
tured Germans shake hands in public and agree
with one another concerning the way in which hence-
forth one will have to write, compose poetry, paint,
make music and even philosophise, yea — rule, so as
neither to stand too much aloof from the culture of
the one, nor to give offence to the " homeliness "
of the other. This they call now "The German
Culture of our times." Well, it is only necessary to
inquire after the characteristic by which that " edu-
cated " person is to be recognised ; now that we
know that his foster-brother, the German Philistine,
makes himself known as such to all the world, with-
out bashfulness, as it were, after innocence is lost.

The educated person nowadays is educated above
all "historically" by his historic consciousness he
saves himself from the sublime in which the Philis-
tine succeeds by his " homeliness." No longer that
enthusiasm which history inspires — as Goethe was
allowed to suppose — but just the blunting of all
enthusiasm is now the goal of these admirers of the
nil admirari, when they try to conceive everything
historically ; to them however we should exclaim :
Ye are the fools of all centuries ! History will make
to you only those confessions, which you are worthy
to receive. The world has been at all times full of
trivialities and nonentities ; to your historic hanker-
ing just these and only these unveil themselves. By
your thousands you may pounce upon an epoch —
you will afterwards hunger as before and be allowed
to boast of your sort of starved soundness. Illam
ipsam quam iactant sanitatem nonfirmitate sedieiunio



68 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

consequuntur. {Dialogus de oratoribus,cap. 2i,.) His-
tory has not thought fit to tell you anything that is
essential, but scorning and invisible she stood by
your side, slipping into this one's hand some state
proceedings, into that one's an ambassadorial report,
into another's a date or an etymology or a pragmatic
cobweb. Do you really believe yourself able to
reckon up history like an addition sum, and do you
consider your common intellect and your mathe-
matical education good enough for that ? How it
must vex you to hear, that others narrate things,
out of the best known periods, which you will never
conceive, never !

If now to this "education," calling itself historic but
destitute of enthusiasm, and to the hostile Philistine
activity, foaming with rage against all that is great,
is added that third brutal and excited company of
those who race after "Fortune" — then that in suinma
results in such a confused shrieking and such a limb-
dislocating turmoil that the thinker with stopped-up
ears and blindfolded eyes flees into the most solitary
wilderness, — where he may see, what those never will
see, where he must hear sounds which rise to him out
of all the depths of nature and come down to him
from the stars. Here he confers with the great prob-
lems floating towards him, whose voices of course
sound just as comfortless-awful, as unhistoric-eternal.
The feeble person flees back from their cold breath,
and the calculating one runs right through them
without perceiving them. They deal worst, however,
with the "educated man" who at times bestows great
pains upon them. To him these phantoms transform
themselves into conceptual cobwebs and hollow



SCHOPENHAUER'S PHILOSOPHY 69

sound-figures. Grasping after them he imagines he
has philosophy; in order to search for them he cHmbs
about in the so-called history of philosophy — and
when at last he has collected and piled up quite a
cloud of such abstractions and stereotyped patterns,
then it may happen to him that a real thinker crosses
his path and — puffs them away. What a desperate
annoyance indeed to meddle with philosophy as an
— " educated person " ! From time to time it is
true it appears to him as if the impossible connection
of philosophy with that which nowadays gives itself
airs as " German Culture " has become possible ;
some mongrel dallies and ogles between the two
spheres and confuses fantasy on this side and on the
other. Meanwhile however one piece of advice is to
be given to the Germans, if they do not wish to let
themselves be confused. They may put to them-
selves the question about everything that they now
call Culture : is this the hoped-for German Culture,
so serious and creative, so redeeming for the German
mind, so purifying for the German virtues that their
only philosopher in this century, Arthur Schopen-
hauer, should have to espouse its cause ?

Here you have the philosopher — now search for
the Culture proper to him ! And if you are able to
divine what kind of culture that would have to be,
which would correspond to such a philosopher, then
you have, in this divination, already passed sentence
on all your culture and on yourselves !


If we know the aims of men who are strangers to
us, it is sufficient for us to approve of or condemn
them as wholes. Those who stand nearer to us we
judge according to the means by which they further
their aims ; we often disapprove of their aims, but
love them for the sake of their means and the style
of their volition. Now philosophical systems are
absolutely true only to their founders, to all later
philosophers they are usually one big mistake, and
to feebler minds a sum of mistakes and truths ; at
any rate if regarded as highest aim they are an
error, and in so far reprehensible. Therefore many
disapprove of every philosopher, because his aim is
not theirs ; they are those whom I called " strangers
to us." Whoever on the contrary finds any pleasure
at all in great men finds pleasure also in such
systems, be they ever so erroneous, for they all
have in them one point which is irrefutable, a
personal touch, and colour ; one can use them in
order to form a picture of the philosopher, just as
from a plant growing in a certain place one can
form conclusions as to the soil. That mode of life, of
viewing human affairs at any rate, has existed once
and is therefore possible ; the "system " is the growth
in this soil or at least a part of this system. . . .

73



74 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

I narrate the history of those philosophers simpli-
fied : I shall bring into relief only that point in
every system which is a little bit oi personality, and
belongs to that which is irrefutable, and indiscus-
sable, which history has to preserve : it is a first
attempt to regain and recreate those natures by
comparison, and to letthe polyphony of Greek nature
at least resound once again : the task is, to bring to
light that which we must always love and revere and
of which no later knowledge can rob us : the great
man.

LATER PREFACE
( Towards the end of 1 879)

This attempt to relate the history of the earlier
Greek philosophers distinguishes itself from similar
attempts by its brevity. This has been accomplished
by mentioning but a small number of the doctrines
of every philosopher, i.e., by incompleteness. Those
doctrines, however, have been selected in which the
personal element of the philosopher re-echoes most
strongly ; whereas a complete enumeration of all pos-
sible propositions handed down to us — as is the cus-
tom in text-books — merely brings about one thing,
the absolute silencing of the personal element. It is
through this that those records become so tedious ;
for in systems which have been refuted it is only this
personal "felement that can still interest us, for this
alone is eternally irrefutable. It is possible to
shape the picture of a man out of three anecdotes. I
endeavour to bring into relief three anecdotes out of
every system and abandon the remainder.



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 75



There are opponents of philosophy, and one does
well to listen to them ; especially if they dissuade the
distempered heads of Germans from metaphysics
and on the other hand preach to them purification-
through the Physis, as Goethe did, or healing through
Music, as Wagner. The physicians of the people 1
condemn philosophy ; he, therefore, who wants to
justify it, must show to what purpose healthy nations
use and have used philosophy. If he can show that,
perhaps even the sick people will benefit by learning
why philosophy is harmful just to them. There are
indeed good instances of a health which can exist
without any philosophy or with quite a moderate,
almost a toying use of it ; thus the Romans at their
best period lived without philosophy. But where is
tobefoundtheinstance of a nation becoming diseased
whom philosophy had restored to health ? When-
ever philosophy showed itself helping, saving, pro-
phylactic, it was with healtliy people ; it made sick
people still more ill. If ever a nation was disinteg-
rated and but loosely connected with the individ-
uals, never has philosophy bound these individuals
closer to the whole. If ever an individual was will-
ing to stand aside and plant around himself the hedge
of self-sufficiency, philosophy was always ready to
isolaie him still more and to destroy him through
isolation. She is dangerous where she is not in
her full right, and it is only the health of a nation
but not that of every nation which gives her this
right.

Let us now look around for the highest authority



^6 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

as to what constitutes the health of a nation. The
Greeks, as the truly healthy nation, have justified
philosophy once for all by having philosophised ;
and that indeed more than all other nations. They
could not even stop at the right time, for still in their
withered age they comported themselves as heated
votaries of philosophy, although they understood by
it only the pious sophistries and the sacrosanct hair-
splittings of Christian dogmatics. They themselves
have much lessened their merit for barbarian pos-
terity by not being able to stop at the right time,
because that posterity in its uninstructed and im-
petuous youth necessarily became entangled in those
artfully woven nets and ropes.

On the contrary, the Greek knew how to begin at
the right time, and this lesson, when one ought to
begin philosophising, they teach more distinctly than
any other nation. For it should not be begun when
trouble comes as perhaps some presume who derive
philosophy from moroseness; no, but in good fortune,
in mature manhood, out of the midst of the fervent
serenity of a brave and victorious man's estate. The
fact that the Greeks philosophised at that timethrows
light on the nature of philosophy and her task as
well as on the nature of the Greeks themselves. Had
they at that time been such commonsense and pre-
cocious experts and gayards as the learned Philis-
tine of our days perhaps imagines, or had their life
been only a state of voluptuous soaring, chiming,
breathing and feeling, as the unlearned visionary is
pleased to assume, then the spring of philosophy
would not have come to light among them. At the
best there would have come forth a brook soon



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 17

trickling away in the sand or evaporating into fogs,
but never that broad river flowing forth with the
proud beat of its waves, the river which we know as
Greek Philosophy.

True, it has been eagerly pointed out how much
the Greeks could find and learn abroad, in the Orient,
and how many different things they may easily have
brought from there. Of course an odd spectacle re-
sulted, when certain scholars brought together the
alleged masters from the Orient and the possible dis-
ciples from Greece, and exhibited Zarathustra near
Heraclitus, the Hindoos near the Eleates, the Egyp-
tians near Empedocles, or even Anaxagoras among
the Jews and Pythagoras among the Chinese. In
detail little has been determined ; but we should in
no way object to the general idea, if people did
not burden us with the conclusion that therefore
Philosophy had only been imported into Greece
and was not indigenous to the soil, yea, that she, as
something foreign, had possibly ruined rather than
improved the Greek. Nothing is more foolish than
to swear by the fact that the Greeks had an abori-
ginal culture ; no, they rather absorbed all the culture
flourishing among other nations, and they advanced
so far, just because they understood how to hurl
the spear further from the very spot where another
nation had let it rest. They were admirable in the
art of learning productively, and so, like them, we
ought to learn from our neighbours, with a view to
Life not to pedantic knowledge, using everything
learnt as a foothold whence to leap high and still
higher than our neighbour. The questions as to the
beginning of philosophy are quite negligible, for



78 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

everywhere in the beginning there is the crude, the
unformed, the empty and the ugly; and in all things
only the higher stages come into consideration. He
who in the place of Greek philosophy prefers to
concern himself with that of Egypt and Persia,
because the latter are perhaps more "original" and
certainly older, proceeds just as ill-advisedly as
those who cannot be at ease before they have traced
back the Greek mythology, so grand and profound,
to such physical trivialities as sun, lightning, weather
and fog, as its prime origins, and who fondly imagine
they have rediscovered for instance in the restricted
worship of the one celestial vault among the other
Indo-Germans a purer form of religion than the poly-
theistic worship of the Greek had been. The road
towards the beginning always leads into barbarism,
and he who is concerned with the Greeks ought
always to keep in mind the fact that the unsubdued
thirst for knowledge in itself always barbarises just
as much as the hatred of knowledge, and that the
Greeks have subdued their inherently insatiable
thirst for knowledge by their regard for Life, by an
ideal need of Life, — since they wished to live imme-
diately that which they learnt. The Greeks also
philosophised as men of culture and with the aims
of culture,and therefore saved themselves the trouble
of inventing once again the elements of philosophy
and knowledge out of some autochthonous conceit,
and with a will they at once set themselves to fill
out, enhance, raise and purify these elements they
had taken over in such a way, that only now in a
higher sense and in a purer sphere they became
inventors. For they discovered the typical philo-



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 79

sopher's genius, and the inventions of all posterity
have added nothing essential.

Every nation is put to shame if one points out
such a wonderfully idealised company of philoso-
phers as that of the early Greek masters, Thales,
Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Anaxagoras,
Empedocles, Democritus and Socrates. All those
men areintegral, entire and self-contained,* and hewn
out of one stone. Severe necessity exists between
their thinking and their character. They are not
bound by any convention, because at that time no
professional class of philosophers and scholars ex-
isted. They all stand before us in magnificent soli-
tude as the only ones who then devoted their life
exclusively to knowledge. They all possess the
virtuous energy of the Ancients, whereby they excel
all the later philosophers in finding their own form
and in perfecting it by metamorphosis in its most
minute details and general aspect. For they were
met by no helpful and facilitating fashion. Thus
together they form what Schopenhauer, in opposi-
tion to the Republic of Scholars, has called a Re-
public of Geniuses ; one giant calls to another across
the arid intervals of ages, and, undisturbed by a
wanton, noisy race of dwarfs, creeping about beneath
them, the sublime intercourse of spirits continues.

Of this sublime intercourse of spirits I have re-
solved to relate those items which our modern hard-
ness of hearing might perhaps hear and understand ;
that means certainly the least of all. It seems to



* Cf. Napoleon's word about Goethe : " Voila un homme ! "
— Tr.



8o VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

me that those old sages from Thales to Socrates have
discussed in that intercourse, although in its most
general aspect, everything that constitutes for our
contemplation the peculiarly Hellenic. In their
intercourse, as already in their personalities, they
express distinctly the great features of Greek genius
of which the whole of Greek history is a shadowy
impression, a hazy copy, which consequently speaks
less clearly. If we could rightly interpret the total
life of the Greek nation, we should ever find reflected
only that picture which in her highest geniuses
shines with more resplendent colours. Even the
first experience of philosophy on Greek soil, the
sanction of the Seven Sages is a distinct and un-
forgettable line in the picture of the Hellenic. Other
nations have their Saints, the Greeks have Sages.
Rightly it has been said that a nation is characterised
not only by her great men but rather by the manner in
which she recognises and honours them. In other
ages the philosopher is an accidental solitary wan-
derer in the most hostile environment, either slinking
through or pushing himself through with clenched
fists. With the Greek however the philosopher is
not accidental ; when in the Sixth and Fifth centuries
amidst the most frightful dangers and seductions of
secularisation he appears and as it were steps forth
from the cav^ of Trophonios into the very midst of
luxuriance, the discoverers' happiness, the wealth
and the sensuousness of the Greek colonies, then we
divine that he comes as a noble warner for the same
purpose for which in those centuries Tragedy was
born and which the Orphic mysteries in their
grotesque hieroglyphics give us to understand. The



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 8 1

opinion of those philosophers on Life and Existence
altogether means so much more than a modern
opinion because they had before themselves Life in
a luxuriant perfection, and because with them, un-
like us, the sense of the thinker was not muddled by
the disunion engendered by the wish for freedom,
beauty, fulness of life and the love for truth that
only asks : What is the good of Life at all ? The
-mission which the philosopher has to discharge with-
in a real Culture, fashioned in a homogeneous style,
cannot be clearly conjectured out of our circum-
stances and experiences for the simple reason that
we have no such culture. No, it is only a Culture
like the Greek which can answer the question as to
that task of the philosopher, only such a Culture can,
as I said before, justify philosophy at all ; because
such a Culture alone knows and can demonstrate
why and how the philosopher is not an accidental,
chance wanderer driven now hither, now thither.
There is a steely necessity which fetters the philo-
sopher to a true Culture : but what if this Culture
does not exist ? Then the philosopher is an incal-
culable and therefore terror-inspiring comet, whereas
in the favourable case, he shines as the central star
in the solar-system of culture. It is for this reason
that the Greeks justify the philosopher, because with
them he is no comet.



After such contemplations it will be accepted with-
out offence if I speak of the pre-Platonic philoso-
phers as of a homogeneous company, and devote
this paper to them exclusively. Something quite



82 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

new begins with Plato ; or it might be said with
equal justice that in comparison with that Republic
of Geniuses from Thales to Socrates, the philoso-
phers since Plato lack something essential.

Whoever wants to express himself unfavourably
about those older masters may call them one-sided,
and their Epigones, with Plato as head, many-sided.
Yet it would be more just and unbiassed to conceive
of the latter as philosophic hybrid -characters, of the
former as the pure types. Plato himself is the first
magnificent hybrid-character, and as such finds ex-
pression as well in his philosophy as in his personality.
In his ideology are united Socratian, Pythagorean,
and Heraclitean elements, and for this reason it is
no typically pure phenomenon. As man, too, Plato
mingles the features of the royally secluded, all-
sufficing Heraclitus, of the melancholy-compassion-
ate and legislatory Pythagoras and of the psycho-
expert dialectician Socrates. All later philosophers
are such hybrid-characters ; wherever something
one-sided does come into prominence with them
as in the case of the Cynics, it is not type but cari-
cature. Much more important however is the fact
that they are founders of sects and that the sects
founded by them are all institutions in direct op-
position to the Hellenic culture and the unity of its
style prevailing up to that time. In their way they
seek a redemption, but only for the individuals or at
the best for groups of friends and disciples closely
connected with them. The activity of the older
philosophers tends, although they were unconscious
of it, towards a cure and purification on a large
scale ; the mighty course of Greek culture is not to



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 83

be Stopped ; awful dangers are to be removed out
of the way of its current ; the philosopher protects
and defends his native country. Now, since Plato,
he is in exile and conspires against his fatherland.

It is a real misfortune that so very little of those
older philosophic masters has come down to us and
that all complete works of theirs are withheld from
us. Involuntarily.on account of that loss, we measure
them according to wrong standards and allow our-
selves to be influenced unfavourably towards them
by the mere accidental fact that Plato and .Aristotle
never lacked appreciatorsand copyists. Some people
presuppose a special providence for books, a fatuni
libellorum; such a providence however would at any
rate be a very malicious one if it deemed it wise to
withhold from us the works of Heraclitus, Empe-
docles' wonderful poem, and the writings of Demo-
critus, whom the ancients put on a par with Plato,
whom he even excels as far as ingenuity goes, and
as a substitute put into our hand Stoics, Epicureans
and Cicero. Probably the most sublime part of Greek
thought and its expression in words is lost to us ; a
fate which will not surprise the man who remembers
the misfortunes of Scotus Erigena or of Pascal, and
who considers that even in this enlightened century
the" first edition of Schopenhauer's ''■The World As
Will And Idea" became waste-paper. If somebody
will presuppose a special fatalistic power with respect
to such things he may do so and say with Goethe :
" Let no one complain about and grumble at things
vile and mean, they are the real rulers, — however
much this be gainsaid !" In particular they are more
powerful than the power of truth. Mankind very



84 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

rarely produces a good book in which with daring
freedom is intonated the battle-song of truth, the
song of philosophic heroism ; and yet whether it is
to live a century longer or to crumble and moulder
into dust and ashes, depends on the most miserable
accidents, on the sudden mental eclipse of men's
heads, on superstitious convulsions and antipathies,
finally on fingers not too fond of writing or even
on eroding bookworms and rainy weather. But we
will not lament but rather take the advice of the
reproving and consolatory words which Hamann
addresses to scholars who lament over lost works.
" Would not the artist who succeeded in throwing a
lentil through the eye of a needle have sufficient, with
a bushel of lentils, to practise his acquired skill? One
would like to put this question to all scholars who
do not know how to use the works of the Ancients
any better than that man used his lentils." It might
be added in our case that not one more word, anec-
dote, or date needed to be transmitted to us than
has been transmitted, indeed that even much less
might have been preserved for us and yet we should
have been able to establish the general doctrine that
the Greeks justify philosophy.

A time which suffers from the so-called " general
education" but has no culture and no unity of style
in her life hardly knows what to do with philosophy,
even if the latter were proclaimed by the very Genius
of Truth in the streets and market-places. Sherather
remains at such a time the learned monologue of the
solitary rambler, the accidental booty of the indi-
vidual, the hidden closet-secret or the innocuous
chatter between academic senility and childhood.



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 85

Nobody dare venture to fulfil in himself the law of
philosophy, nobody lives philosophically, with that
simple manly faith which compelled an Ancient,
wherever he was, whatever he did, to deport him-
self as a Stoic, when he had once pledged his faith
to the Stoa. All modern philosophising is limited
politically and regulated by the police to learned
semblance. Thanks to governments, churches, aca-
demies, customs, fashions, and the cowardice of man,
it never gets beyond the sigh : " If only! . . ." or be-
yond the knowledge : " Once upon a time there was
. . ." Philosophy is without rights ; therefore modern
man, if he were at all courageous and conscientious,
ought to condemn her and perhaps banish her with
words similar to those by which Plato banished
the tragic poets from his State. Of course there
would be left a reply for her, as there remained to
those poets against Plato. If one once compelled
her to speak out she might say perhaps: "Miserable
Nation ! Is it my fault if among you I am on the
tramp, like a fortune teller through the land, and
must hide and disguise myself, as if I were a great
sinner and ye my judges? Just look at my sister.
Art! It is with her as with me ; we have been cast
adrift among the Barbarians and no longer know
how to save ourselves. Here we are lacking, it is
true, every good right; but the judges before whom
we find justice judge you also and will tell you:
First acquire a culture; then you shall experience
what Philosophy can and will do." —



86 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

3
Greek philosophy seems to begin with a prepos-
terous fancy, with the proposition that water is the
origin and mother-womb of all things. Is it really
necessary to stop there and become serious ? Yes,
and for three reasons : Firstly, because the proposi-
tion does enunciate something about the origin of
things ; secondly, because it does so without figure
and fable ; thirdly and lastly, because in it is con-
tained, although only in the chrysalis state, the idea :
Everything is one. The first mentioned reason leaves
Thales still in the company of religious and super-
stitious people, the second however takes him out
of this company and shows him to us as a natural
philosopher, but by virtue of the third, Thales be-
comes the first Greek philosopher. If he had said:
"Out of water earth is evolved," we should only have
a scientific hypothesis ; a false one, though never-
theless difficult to refute. But he went beyond the
scientific. In his presentation of this concept of
unity through the hypothesis of water, Thales has
not surmounted the low level of the physical dis-
cernments of his time, but at the best overleapt
them. The deficient and unorganised observations
of an empiric nature which Thales had made as to
the occurrence and transformations of water, or to
be more exact, of the Moist, would not in the least
have made possible or even suggested such an im-
mense generalisation. That which drove him to this
generalisation was a metaphysical dogma, which had
its origin in a mystic intuition and which together
with the ever renewed endeavours to express it better,



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 87

we find in all philosophies, — the proposition: Every-
thing is one !

How despotically such a faith deals with all em-
piricism is worthy of note ; with Thales especially
one can learn how Philosophy has behaved at all
times, when she wanted to get beyond the hedges
of experience to her magically attracting goal. On
light supports she leaps in advance ; hope and divina-
tion wing her feet. Calculating reason too, clumsily
pants after her and seeks better supports in its
attempt to reach that alluring goal, at which its
divine companion has already arrived. One sees in
■imagination two wanderers by a wild forest-stream
which carries with it rolling stones ; the one, light-
footed, leaps over it using the stones and swinging
himself upon them ever further and further, though
they precipitously sink into the depths behind him.
The other stands helpless there most of the time ;
he has first to build a pathway which will bear his
heavy, weary step ; sometimes that cannot be done
and then no god will help him across the stream.
What therefore carries philosophical thinking so
quickly to its goal ? Does it distinguish itself from
calculating and measuring thought only by its more
rapid flight through large spaces ? No, for a strange
illogical power wings the foot of philosophical think-
ing ; and this power is Fancy. Lifted by the latter,
oljilosophical thinking leaps from possibility to pos-
'■^bility, and these for the time being are taken as
certainties ; and now and then even whilst on the
wing it gets hold of certainties. An ingenious pre-
sentiment shows them to the flier ; demonstrable
certainties are divined at ^ distance to be at this



88 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

point. Especially powerful is the strength of Fancy
in the lightning-like seizing and illuminating of simi-
larities ; afterwards reflection applies its standards
and models and seeks to substitute the similarities
by equalities, that which was seen side by side by
causalities. But though this should never be possible,
even in the case of Thales the indemonstrable philo-
sophising has yet its value ; although all supports are
broken when Logic and the rigidity of Empiricism
want to get across to the proposition : Everything is
water ; yet still there is always, after the demolition
of the scientific edifice, a remainder, and in this very
remainder lies a moving force and as it were the
hope of future fertility.

Of course I do not mean that the thought in any
restriction or attenuation, or as allegory, still retains
some kind of " truth " ; as if, for instance, one might
imagine the creating artist standing near a waterfall,
and seeing in the forms which leap towards him, an
artisticallyprefiguring game of thewater with human
and animal bodies, masks, plants, rocks, nymphs,
griffins, and with all existing types in general, so that
to him the proposition : Everything is water, is con-
firmed. The thought of Thales has rather its value
— even after the perception of its indemonstrable-
ness— in the very fact, that it was meant unmythi-
cally and unallegorically. The Greeks among whom
Thales became so suddenly conspicuous were the
anti-type of all realists by only believing essentially
in the reality of men and gods, and by contem-
plating the whole of nature as if it were only a
disguise, masquerade and metamorphosis of these
god-men. Man was to them the truth, and essence



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 89

of things ; everything else mere phenomenon and
deceiving play. For that very reason they experi-
enced incredible difficulty in conceiving of ideas as
ideas. Whilst with the moderns the most personal
item sublimates itself into abstractions, with them
the most abstract notions became personified. Thales,
however, said, " Not man but water is the reality of
things " ; he began to believe in nature, in so far that
he at least believed in water. As a mathematician
and astronomer he had grown cold towards every-
thing mythical and allegorical, and even if he did
not succeed in becoming disillusioned as to the pure
abstraction, Everything is one, and although he left
off at a physical expression he was nevertheless
among the Greeks of his time a surprising rarity.
Perhaps the exceedingly conspicuous Orpheans pos-
sessed in a still higher degree than he the faculty of
conceiving abstractions and of thinking unplasti-
cally ; only they did not succeed in expressing these
abstractions except in the form of the allegory. Also
Pherecydes of Syrus who is a contemporary of
Thales and akin to him in many physical concep-
tions hovers with the expression of the latter in that
middle region where Allegory is wedded to Mythos,
so that he dares, for example, to compare the earth
with a winged oak, which hangs in the air with
spread pinions and which Zeus bedecks, after the
defeat of Kronos, with a magnificent robe of honour,
into which with his own hands Zeus embroiders lands,
water and rivers. In contrast with such gloomy alleg-
orical philosophising scarcely to be translated into the
realm of the comprehensible, Thales' are the works
of a creative master who began to look into Nature's



go VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

depths without fantastic fabling. If as it is true
he used Science and the demonstrable but soon out-
leapt them, then this likewise is a typical character-
istic of the philosophical genius. The Greek word
which designates the Sage belongs etymologically
to sapio, I taste, sapiens, the tasting one, sisypkos,
the man of the most delicate taste ; the peculiar
art of the philosopher therefore consists, according
to the opinion of the people, in a delicate selective
judgment by taste, by discernment, by significant
differentiation. He is not prudent, if one calls him
prudent, who in his own affairs finds out the good ;
Aristotle rightly says : " That which Thales and
Anaxagoras know, people will call unusual, astound-
ing,difificult,divine but — useless,since human posses-
sions were of no concern to those two." Through thus
selecting and precipitating the unusual, astounding,
difficult, and divine. Philosophy marks the boundary-
lines dividing her from Science in the same way as
she does it from Prudence by the emphasising of the
useless. Science without thus selecting, without such
delicate taste, pounces upon everything knowable,
in the blind covetousness to know all at any price ;
philosophical thinking however is always on the
track of the things worth knowing, on the track of
the great and most important discernments. Now
the idea of greatness is changeable, as well in the
moral as in the esthetic realm, thus Philosophy
begins with a legislation with respect to greatness,
she becomes a Nomenclator. " That is great,"
she says, and therewith she raises man above
the blind, untamed covetousness of his thirst for
knowledge. By the idea of greatness she assuages



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY gi

this thirst : and it is chiefly by this, that she contem-
plates the greatest discernment, that of the essence
and kernel of things, as attainable and attained.
When Thales says, " Everything is water," man is
startled up out of his worm-like mauling of and
crawling about among the individual sciences ; he
divines the last solution of things and masters through
this divination the common perplexity of the lower
grades of knowledge. The philosopher tries to make
the total-chord of the universe re-echo within him-
self and then to project it into ideas outside himself:
whilst he is contemplative like the creating artist,
sympathetic like the religionist, looking out for ends
and causalities like the scientific man, whilst he feels
himself swell up to the macrocosm, he still retains
the circumspection to contemplate himself coldly
as the reflex of the world ; he retains that cool-
headedness, which the dramatic artist possesses,
when he transforms himself into other bodies, speaks
out of them, and yet knows how to project this
transformation outside himself into written verses.
What the verse is to the poet, dialectic thinking is
to the philosopher ; he snatches at it in order to hold
fast his enchantment, in order to petrify it. And
just as words and verse to the dramatist are only
stammerings in a foreign language, to tell in it what
he lived, what he saw, and what he can directly
promulgate by gesture and music only, thus the
expression of every deep philosophical intuition by
means of dialectics and scientific reflection is, it is
true, on the one hand the only means to communi-
cate what has been seen, but on the other hand it is
a paltry means, and at the bottom a metaphorical.



92 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

absolutely inexact translation into a different sphere
and language. Thus Thales saw the Unity of the
" Existent," and when he wanted to communicate this
idea he talked of water.

4

Whilst the general type of the philosopher in the
picture of Thales is set off rather hazily, the picture
of his great successor already speaks much more
distinctly to us. Anaximander of Milet, the first
philosophical author of the Ancients, writes in the
very way that the typical philosopher will always
write as long as he is not alienated from ingenuous-
ness and naivete by odd claims : in a grand lapi-
darian style of writing, sentence for sentence ... a
witness of a new inspiration, and an expression of
the sojourning in sublime contemplations. The
thought and its form are milestones on the path
towards the highest wisdom. With such a lapi-
darian emphasis Anaximander once said : " Whence
things originated, thither, according to necessity,
they must return and perish ; for they must pay pen-
alty and be judged for their injustices according to
the order of time." Enigmatical utterance of a true
pessimist, oracular inscription on the boundary-stone
of Greek philosophy, how shall we explain thee ?

The only serious moralist of our century in the
Parergis (Vol. ii., chap. 12, "Additional Remarks on
The Doctrine about the Suffering in the World,
Appendix of Corresponding Passages ") urges on us a
similar contemplation : "The right standard by which
to judge every human being is that he really is a
being who ought not to exist at all, but who is ex-



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 93

piating his existence by manifold forms of suffering
and death: — What can oneexpect fromsuch abeing?
Are we not all sinners condemned to death ? We
expiate our birth firstly by our life and secondly
by our death." He who in the physiognomy of
our universal human lot reads this doctrine and
already recognises the fundamental bad quality of
every human life, in the fact that none can stand
a very close and careful contemplation — although
our time, accustomed to the biographical epidemic,
seems to think otherwise and more loftily about the
dignity of man ; he who, like Schopenhauer, on "the
heights of the Indian breezes " has heard the sacred
word about the moral value of existence, will be kept
with difficulty from making an extremely anthropo-
morphic metaphor and from generalizing that mel-
ancholy doctrine — at first only limited to human
life — and applying it by transmission to the general
character of all existence. It may not be very logical,
it is however at any rate very human and moreover
quite in harmony with the philosophical leaping de-
scribed above, now with Anaximander to consider
all Becoming as a punishable emancipation from
eternal " Being," as a wrong that is to be atoned for
by destruction. Everything that has once come into
existence also perishes, whether we think of human
life or of water or of heat and cold ; everywhere
where definite qualities are to be noticed, we are
allowed to prophesy the extinction of these qualities
— according to the all-embracing proof of experience.
Thus a being that possesses definite qualities and
consists of them, can never be the origin and prin-
ciple of things ; the veritable ens, the " Existent," An-



94 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

aximander concluded, cannot possess any definite
qualities, otherwise, like all other things, it would
necessarily have originated and perished. In order
that Becoming may not cease, the Primordial-being
must be indefinite. The immortality and eternity
of the Primordial-being lies not in an infiniteness
and inexhaustibility — as usually the expounders of
Anaximander presuppose — but in this, that it lacks
the definite qualities which lead to destruction, for
which reason it bears also its name : The Indefinite.
The thus labelled Primordial-being is superior to all
Becoming and for this very reason it guarantees the
eternity and unimpeded course of Becoming. This
last unity in that Indefinite, the mother-womb of all
things, can, it is true, be designated only negatively
by man, as something to which no predicate out of
the existing world of Becoming can be allotted, and
might be considered a peer to the Kantian " Thing-
in-itself"

Of course he who is able to wrangle persistently
with others as to what kind of thing that primordial
substance really was, whether perhaps an intermedi-
ate thing between air and water, or perhaps between
air and fire, has not understood our philosopher at all;
this is likewise to be said about those, who seriously
ask themselves, whether Anaximander had thought
of his primordial substance as a mixture of all exist-
ing substances. Rather we must direct our gaze to
the place where we can learn that Anaximander no
longer treated the question of the origin of the world
as purely physical ; we must direct our gaze towards
that first stated lapidarian proposition. When on
the contrary he saw a sum of wrongs to be expiated



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 95

in the plurality of things that have become, then
he, as the first Greek, with daring grasp caught
up the tangle of the most profound ethical problem.
How can anything perish that has a right to exist ?''^
Whence that restless Becoming and giving-birth,
whence that expression of painful distortion on the
face of Nature, whence the never-ending dirge in all
realms of existence ? Out of this world of injustice,
of audacious apostasy from the primordial-unity of
things Anaximander flees into a metaphysical castle,
leaning out of which he turns his gaze far and wide
in order at last, after a pensive silence, to address to
all beings this question : " What is your existence
worth? And if it is worth nothing why are you
there ? By your guilt, I observe, you sojourn in this
world. You will have to expiate it by death. Look
how your earth fades ; the seas decrease and dry up,
the marine-shell on the mountain shows you how
much already they have dried up ; fire destroys your
world even now, finally it will end in smoke and
ashes. But again and again such a world of transi-
toriness will ever build itself up ; who shall redeem
you from the curse of Becoming ? "

Not every kind of life may have been welcome to
a man who put such questions, whose upward-soar-
ing thinking continually broke the empiric ropes,
in order to take at once to the highest, superlunary
flight. Willingly we believe tradition, that he walked
along in especially dignified attire and showed a
truly tragic hauteur in his gestures and habits of
life. He lived as he wrote ; he spoke as solemnly as
he dressed himself, he raised his hand and placed
his foot as if this existence was a tragedy, and he



96 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

had been born in order to co-operate in that tragedy
by playing the role of hero. In all that he was the
great model of Empedocles. His fellow-citizens
elected him the leader of an emigrating colony —
perhaps they were pleased at being able to honour
him and at the same time to get rid of him. His
thought also emigrated and founded colonies ; in
Ephesus and in Elea they could not get rid of him ;
and if they could not resolve upon staying at the spot
where he stood, they nevertheless knew that they
had been led there by him, whence they now pre-
pared to proceed without him.
f-'jrhales shows the need of simplifying the empire
of plurality, and of reducing it to a mere expansion
or disguise of the one single existing quality, water.
Anaximander goes beyond him with two steps.
Firstly he puts the question to himself: How, if
there exists an eternal Unity at all, is that Plurality
possible ? and he takes the answer out of the con-
tradictory, self-devouring and denying character of
this Plurality. The existence of this Plurality be-
comes a moral phenomenon to him ; it is not justi-
fied, it expiates itself continually through destruc-
tion. But then the questions occur to him : Yet why
has not everything that has become perished long
ago, since, indeed, quite an eternity of time has
already gone by ? Whence the ceaseless current of
the River of Becoming ? He can save himself from
these questions only by mystic possibilities : the
eternal Becoming can have its origin only in the
eternal " Being," the conditions for that apostasy from
that eternal "Being" to a Becoming in injustice are
ever the same, the constellation of things cannot



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 9/

help itself being thus fashioned, that no end is to be
seen of that stepping forth of the individual being
out of the lap of the " Indefinite." At this Anaxi-
mander stayed ; that is, he remained within the deep
shadows which like gigantic spectres were lying on
the mountain range of such a world-perception. The
more one wanted to approach the problem of solving
how out of the Indefinite the Definite, out of the
Eternal the Temporal, out of the Just the Unjust
could by secession ever originate, the darker the

night became.

5
Towards the midst of this mystic night, in which
Anaximander's problem of the Becoming was
wrapped up, Heraclitus of Ephesus approached and
illuminated it by a divine flash of lightning. " I contem-
plate the Becoming," he exclaimed, — " and nobody
has so attentively watched this eternal wave-surging
and rhythm of things. And what do I behold ? Law-
fulness, infallible certainty, ever equal paths of Jus-
tice, condemning Erinyes behind all transgressions of
the laws, the whole world the spectacle of a govern-
ing justice and of demoniacally omnipresent natural
forces subject to justice's sway. I do not behold the
punishment of that which has become, but the justi-
fication of Becoming. When has sacrilege, when
has apostasy manifested itself in inviolable forms,
in laws esteemed sacred? Where injustice sways,
there is caprice, disorder, irregularity, contradiction ;
where however Law and Zeus' daughter, Dike, rule
alone, as in this world, how could the sphere of guilt,
of expiation, of judgment, and as it were the place
of execution of all condemned ones be there ? "



gS VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

From this intuition Heraclitus took two coherent
negations, which are put into the right light only
by a comparison with the propositions of his prede-
cessor. Firstly, he denied the duality of two quite
diverse worlds, into the assumption of which Anaxi-
mander had been pushed ; he no longer distinguished
a physical world from a metaphysical, a realm of
definite qualities from a realm of indefinable inde-
finiteness. Now after this first step he. could neither
be kept back any longer from a still greater audacity
of denying : he denied " Being " altogether. For
this one world which was left to him, — shielded all
round by eternal, unwritten laws, flowing up and
down in the brazen beat of rhythm, — shows nowhere
persistence, indestructibility, a bulwark in the stream.
Louder than Anaximander, Heraclitus exclaimed :
" I see nothing but Becoming. Be not deceived !
It is the fault of your limited outlook and not the
fault of the essence of things if you believe that
you see firm land anywhere in the ocean of Becom-
ing and Passing. You need names for things, just
as if they had a rigid permanence, but the very river
in which you bathe a second time is no longer the
same one which you entered before."

Heraclitus has as his royal property the highest
power of intuitive conception, whereas towards the
other mode of conception which is consummated
by ideas and logical combinations, that is towards
reason, he shows himself cool, apathetic, even hos-
tile, and he seems to derive a pleasure when he is
able to contradict reason by means of a truth gained
intuitively, and this he does in such propositions as:
" Everything has always its opposite within itself,"



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 99

SO fearlessly that Aristotle before the tribunal of
Reason accuses him of the highest crime, of having
sinned against the law of opposition. Intuitive repre-
sentation however embraces two things : firstly, the
present, motley, changing world, pressing on us in
all experiences, secondly, the conditions by means
of which alone any experience of this world becomes
possible : time and space. For these are able to be i
intuitively apprehended, purely in themselves and
independent of any experience ; i.e., they can be
perceived, although they are without definite con-
tents. If now Heraclitus considered time in this
fashion, dissociated from all experiences, he had in
it the most instructive monogram of all that which
falls within the realm of intuitive conception. Just
as he conceived of time, so also for instance did
Schopenhauer, who repeatedly says of it : that in it
every instant exists only in so far as it has anni-
hilated the preceding one, its father, in order to be
itself effaced equally quickly ; that past and future
are as unreal as any dream ; that the present is only
the dimensionless and unstable boundary between
the two ; that however, like time, so space, and again
like the latter, so also everything that is simultan-
eously in space and time, has only a relative exist-
ence, only through and for the sake of a something
else, of the same kind as itself, i.e., existing only
under the same limitations. This truth is in the
highest degree self-evident, accessible to everyone,
and just for that very reason, abstractly and ration-
ally, it is only attained with great difficulty. Who-
ever has this truth before his eyes must however also
proceed at once to the next Heraclitean consequence



lOO VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

and say that the whole essence of actuality is in fact
activity, and that for actuality there is no other kind
of existence and reality, as Schopenhauer has like-
wise expounded ( " The World As Will And Idea,"
Vol. I., Bk. I, sec. 4): "Only as active does it fill
space and time : its action upon the immediate object
determines the perception in which alone it exists :
the effect of the action of any material object upon
any other, is known only in so far as the latter acts
upon the immediate object in a different way from
that in which it acted before; it consists in this alone.
Cause and effect thus constitute the whole nature of
matter ; its true being is its action. The totality
of everything material is therefore very appropri-
ately called in German Wirklichkeit (actuality) —
a word which is far more expressive than Realitdt
(reality).* That upon which actuality acts is always
matter; actuality's whole ' Being ' and essence there-
fore consist only in the orderly change, which one
part of it causes in another, and is therefore wholly
relative, according to a relation which is valid only
within the boundary of actuality, as in the case of
time and space.''

The eternal and exclusive Becoming, the total in-
stability of all reality and actuality, which continu-
ally works and becomes and never is, as Heraclitus
teaches — is an awful and appalling conception, and
in its effects most nearly related to that sensation, by
which during an earthquake one loses confidence in
the firmly-grounded earth. It required anastonishing


EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY lOI

strength to translate this effect into its opposite, into
the sublime, into happy astonishment. Heraclitus
accomplished this through an observation of the
proper course of all Becoming and Passing, which
he conceived of under the form of polarity, as the
divergence of a force into two qualitatively different,
opposite actions, striving after reunion. A quality
is set continually at variance with itself and separ-
ates itself into its opposites : these opposites con-
tinually strive again one towards another. The
common people of course think to recognise some-
thing rigid, completed, consistent ; but the fact of
the matter is that at any instant, bright and dark,
sour and sweet are side by side and attached to one
another like two wrestlers of whom sometimes the
one succeeds, sometimes the other. According to
Heraclitus honey is at the same time sweet and
bitter, and the world itself an amphora whose
contents constantly need stirring up. Out of the
war of the opposites all Becoming originates ; the
definite and to us seemingly persistent qualities
express only the momentary predominance of the
one fighter, but with that the war is not at an end ;
the wrestling continues to all eternity. Everything
happens according to this struggle, and this very
struggle manifests eternal justice. It is a wonder-
ful conception, drawn from the purest source of
Hellenism, which considers the struggle as the con-
tinual sway of a homogeneous, severe justice bound
by eternal laws. Only a Greek was able to consider
this conception as the fundament of a Cosmodicy ; it
is Hesiod's good Eris transfigured into the cosmic
principle, it is the idea of a contest, an idea held by



I02 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

individual Greeks and by their State, and translated
out of the gymnasia and palaestra, out of the artistic
agonistics, out of the struggle of the political parties
and of the towns into the most general principle, so
that the machinery of the universe is regulated by
it. Just as every Greek fought as though he alone
were in the right, and as though an absolutely
sure standard of judicial opinion could at any in-
stant decide whither victory is inclining, thus the
qualities wrestle one with another, according to in-
violable laws and standards which are inherent in
the struggle. The Things themselves in the per-
manency of which the limited intellect of man and
animal believes, do not "exist" at all ; they are as the
fierce flashing and fiery sparkling of drawn swords,
as the stars of Victory rising with a radiant re-
splendence in the battle of the opposite qualities.

That struggle which is peculiar to all Becoming,
that eternal interchange of victory is again described
by Schopenhauer : (" The World As Will And Idea,"
Vol. i., Bk. 2, sec. 27) " The permanent matter must
constantly change its form ; for under the guid-
ance of causality, mechanical, physical, chemical,
and organic phenomena, eagerly striving to appear,
wrest the matter from each other, for each desires
to reveal its own Idea. This strife may be followed
up through the whole of nature ; indeed nature
exists only through it." The following pages give
the most noteworthy illustrations of this struggle,
only that the prevailing tone of this description ever
remains other than that of Heraclitus in so far as
to Schopenhauer the struggle is a proof of the Will
to Life falling out with itself; it is to him a feasting



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY IO3

on itself on the part of this dismal, dull impulse, as
a phenomenon on the whole horrible and not at all
making for happiness. The arena and the object
of this struggle is Matter, — whichsome natural forces
alternately endeavour to disintegrate and build up
again at the expense of other natural forces, — as
also Space and Time, the union of which through
causality is this very matter.



Whilst the imagination of Heraclitus measured the
restlessly moving universe, the " actuality " ( Wirk-
lichkeif), with the eye of the happy spectator, who
sees innumerable pairs wrestling in joyous combat
entrusted to the superintendence of severe umpires,
a still higher presentiment seized him, he no longer
could contemplate the wrestling pairs and the um-
pires, separated one from another ; the very umpires
seemed to fight, and the fighters seemed to be their
own judges — yea, since at the bottom he conceived
only of the one Justice eternally swaying, he dared
to exclaim : "The contest of The Many is itself pure
justice. And after all: The One is The Many. For
what are all those qualities according to their nature?
Are they immortal gods ? Are they separate beings
working for themselves from the beginning and with-
out end? And if the world which we see knows
only Becoming and Passing but no Permanence,
should perhaps those qualities constitute a differently
fashioned metaphysical world, true, not a world of
unity as Anaximander sought behind the fluttering
veil of plurality, but a world of eternal and essential
pluralities ? " Is it possible that however violently



I04 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

he had denied such duality, Heraclitus has after all
by a round-about way accidentally got into the dual
cosmic order, an order with an Olympus of numerous
immortal gods and demons, — viz., many realities, —
and with a human world, which sees only the dust-
cloud of the Olympic struggle and the flashing of
divine spears, — i.e., only a Becoming? Anaximander
had fled just from these definite qualities into the
lap of the metaphysical " Indefinite" ; because the
former became and passed, he had denied them a
true and essential existence ; however should it not
seem now as if the Becoming is only the looming-
into-view of a struggle of eternal qualities ? When
we speak of the Becoming, should not the original
cause of this be sought in the peculiar feebleness of
human cognition — whereas in the nature of things
there is perhaps no Becoming, but only a co-existing
of many true increate indestructible realities ?

These are Heraclitean loop-holes and labyrinths ;
he exclaims once again : " The 'One' is the 'Many'."
The many perceptible qualities are neither eternal
entities, nor phantasmata of our senses (Anaxagoras
conceives them later on as the former, Parmenides
as the latter), they are neither rigid, sovereign "Being"
nor fleeting Appearance hovering in human minds.
The third possibility which alone was left to Hera-
clitus nobody will be able to divine with dialectic
sagacity and as it were by calculation, for what he
invented here is a rarity even in the realm of mystic
incredibilities and unexpected cosmic metaphors. —
The world is the Game of Zeus, or expressed more
physically, the game of fire with itself, the " One "
is only in this sense at the same time the " Many." — ■



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY IO5

In order to elucidate in the first place the intro-
duction of fire as a world-shaping force, I recall
how Anaximander had further developed the theory
of water as the origin of things. Placing confi-
dence in the essential part of Thales' theory, and
strengthening and adding to the latter's observa-
tions, Anaximander however was not to be con-
vinced that before the water and, as it were, after
the water there was no further stage of quality : no,
to him out of the Warm and the Cold the Moist
seemed to form itself, and the Warm and the Cold
therefore were supposed to be the preliminary
stages, the still more original qualities. With their
issuing forth from the primordial existence of the
" Indefinite," Becoming begins. Heraclitus who as
physicist subordinated himself to the importance
of Anaximander, explains to himself this Anaxi-
mandrian " Warm " as the respiration, the warm
breath, the dry vapours, in short as the fiery element :
about this fire he now enunciates the same as Thales
and Anaximander had enunciated about the water :
that in innumerable metamorphoses it was passing
along the path of Becoming, especially in the three
chief aggregate stages as something Warm, Moist,
and Firm. For water in descending is transformed
into earth, in ascending into fire: or as Heraclitus
appears to have expressed himself more exactly :
from the sea ascend only the pure vapours which
serve as food to the divine fire of the stars, from
the earth only the dark, foggy ones, from which
the Moist derives its nourishment. The pure
vapours are the transitional stage in the passing
of sea into fire, the impure the transitional stage



I06 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

in the passing of earth into water. Thus the
two paths of metamorphosis of the fire run con-
tinuously side by side, upwards and downwards, to
and fro, from fire to water, from water to earth,
from earth back again to water, from water to fire.
Whereas Heraclitus is a follower of Anaximander
in the most important of these conceptions, e.g.,
that the fire is kept up by the evaporations, or here-
in, that out of the water is dissolved partly earth,
partly fire ; he is on the other hand quite inde-
pendent and in opposition to Anaximander in
excluding the " Cold " from the physical process,
whilst Anaximander had put it side by side with
the " Warm " as having the same rights, so as to let
the " Moist '' originate out of both. To do so,'was
of course a necessity to Heraclitus, for if everything
is to be fire, then, however many possibilities of its
transformation might be assumed, nothing can exist
that would be the absolute antithesis to fire ; he has,
therefore, probably interpreted only as a degree of
the " Warm" that which is called the " Cold," and he
could justify this interpretation without difficulty.
Much more important than this deviation from the
doctrine of Anaximander is a further agreement ;
he, like the latter, believes in an end of the world
periodically repeating itself and in an ever-renewed
emerging of another world out of the all-destroying
world-fire. The period during which the world
hastens towards that world-fire and the dissolution
into pure fire is characterised by him most strikingly
as a demand and a need ; the state of being com-
pletely swallowed up by the fire as satiety ; and
now to us remains the question as to how he under-



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY I07

stood and named the newly awakening impulse for
world-creation, the pouring-out-of-itself into the
forms of plurality. The Greek proverb seems to come
to our assistance with the thought that "satiety gives
birth to crime" (the Hybris) and one may indeed ask
oneself for a minute whether perhaps Heraclitus has
derived that return to plurality out of the Hybris.
Let us just take this thought seriously : in its light the
face of Heraclitus changes before our eyes, the proud
gleam of his eyes dies out, a wrinkled expression of
painful resignation, of impotence becomes distinct, it
seems that we know why later antiquity called him
the "weeping philosopher." Is not the whole world-
process now an act of punishment of the Hybris ?
The plurality the result of a crime? The transforma-
tion of the pure into the impure, the consequence of
injustice.'' Isnot the guilt nowshiftedintothe essence
of the things and indeed, the world of Becoming and
of individuals accordingly exonerated from guilt ;
yet at the same time are they not condemned for
ever and ever to bear the consequences of guilt ?

7

That dangerous word, Hybris, is indeed the touch-
stone for every Heraclitean ; here he may show
whether he has understood or mistaken his master.
Is there in this world : Guilt, injustice, contradiction,
suffering?

Yes, exclaims Heraclitus, but only for the limited
human being, who sees divergently and not con-
vergently, not for the contuitive god ; to him every-
thing opposing converges into one harmony, invisible
it is true to the common human eye, yet compre-



I08 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

hensible to him who like Heraclitus resembles the
contemplative god. Before his fiery eye no drop of
injustice is left in the world poured out around him,
and even that cardinal obstacle — how pure fire can
take up its quarters in forms so impure — he masters
by means of a sublime simile. A Becoming and
Passing, a building and destroying, without any
moral bias, in perpetual innocence is in this world
only the play of the artist and of the child. And
similarly, just as the child and the artist play, the
eternally living fire plays, builds up and destroys, in
innocence — and this game the ^on plays with him-
self. Transforming himself into water and earth,
like a child he piles heaps of sand by the sea, piles
up and demolishes ; from time to time he recom-
mences the game. A moment of satiety, then again
desire seizes him, as desire compels the artist to
create. Not wantonness, but the ever newly awaken-
ing impulse to play, calls into life other worlds. The
child throws away his toys ; but soon he starts again
in an innocent frame of mind. As soon however as
the child builds he connects, joins and forms law-
fully and according to an innate sense of order.

Thus only is the world contemplated by the
aesthetic man, who has learned from the artist and
the genesis of the latter's work, how the struggle of
plurality can yet bear within itself law and justice,
how the artist stands contemplative above, and
working within the work of art, how necessity and
play, antagonism and harmony must pair themselves
for the procreation of the work of art.

Who now will still demand from such a philosophy
a system of Ethics with the necessary imperatives



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY I09

— Thou Shalt, — or even reproach Heraclitus with
such a deficiency. Man down to his last fibre is
Necessity and absolutely " unfi-ee " — if by freedom
one understands the foolish claim to be able to
change at will one's essentia like a garment, a claim,
which up to the present every serious philosophy
has rejected with due scorn. That so few human
beings live with consciousness in the Logos and in
accordance with the all-overlooking artist's eye
originates from their souls being wet and from the
fact that men's eyes and ears, their intellect in general
is a bad witness when " moist ooze fills their souls."
Why that is so, is not questioned any more than
why fire becomes water and earth. Heraclitus is
not compelled to prove (as Leibnitz was) that this
world was even the best of all ; it was sufficient for
him that the world is the beautiful, innocent play of
the .(Eon. Man on the whole is to him even an
irrational being, with which the fact that in all his
essence the law of all-ruling reason is fulfilled does
not clash. He does not occupy a specially favoured
position in nature, whose highest phenomenon is
not simple-minded man, but fire, for instance, as
stars. In so far as man has through necessity re-
ceived a share of fire, he is a little more rational ;
as far as he consists of earth and water it stands
badly with his reason. He is not compelled to take
cognisance of the Logos simply because he is a
human being. Why is there water, why earth?
This to Heraclitus is a much more serious problem
than to ask, why men are so stupid and bad. In
the highest and the most perverted men the same
inherent lawfulness and justice manifest themselves.



no VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

If however one would ask HeracHtus the question
" Why is fire not always fire, why is it now water,
now earth ? " then he would only just answer : " It
is a game, don't take it too pathetically and still less,
morally." Heraclitus describes only the existing
world and has the same contemplative pleasure in
it which the artist experiences when looking at his
growing work. Only those who have cause to be
discontented with his natural history of man find
him gloomy, melancholy, tearful, sombre, atrabil-
arious, pessimistic and altogether hateful. He how-
ever would take these discontented people, together
with their antipathies and sympathies, their hatred
and their love, as negligible and perhaps answer
them with some such comment as : " Dogs bark at
anything they do not know," or, " To the ass chaff
is preferable to gold."

With such discontented persons also originate
the numerous complaints as to the obscurity of the
Heraclitean style ; probably no man has ever
written clearer and more illuminatingly; of course,
very abruptly, and therefore naturally obscure to the
racing readers. But why a philosopher should in-
tentionally write obscurely — a thing habitually said
about Heraclitus — is absolutely inexplicable; unless
he has some cause to hide his thoughts or is suffici-
ently a rogue to conceal his thoughtlessness under-
neath words. One is, as Schopenhauer says, indeed
compelled by lucid expression to prevent misunder-
standings even in affairs of practical every-day life,
how then should one be allowed to express oneself
indistinctly, indeed puzzlingly in the most difficult,
most abstruse, scarcely attainable object of thinking.



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY III

the tasks of philosophy ? With respect to brevity
however Jean Paul gives a good precept: "On the
whole it is right that everything great — of deep
meaning to a rare mind — should be uttered with
brevity and (therefore) obscurely so that the paltry
mind would rather proclaim it to be nonsense than
translate it into the realm of his empty-headedness.
For common minds have an ugly ability to perceive
in the deepest and richest saying nothing but their
own every-day opinion." Moreover and in spite of
it Heraclitus has not escaped the "paltry minds";
already the Stoics have " re-expounded" him into the
shallow and dragged down his aesthetic fundamental-
perception as to the play of the world to the miser-
able level of the common regard for the practical
ends of the world and more explicitly for the advan-
tages of man, so that out of his Physics has arisen
in those heads a crude optimism, with the continual
invitation to Dick, Tom, and Harry, " Plaudite
amid ! "

8

Heraclitus was proud ; and if it comes to pride
with a philosopher then it is a great pride. - His work
never refers him to a " public," the applause of the
masses and the hailing chorus of contemporaries.
To wander lonely alonghis path belongstothenature
of the philosopher. His talents are the most rare, in
a certain sense the most unnatural and at the same
time exclusive and hostile even toward kindred
talents. The wall of his self-sufiSciency must be of
diamond, if it is not to be demolished and broken,
for everything is in motion against him. His journey
to immortality is more cumbersome and impeded



112 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

than any other and yet nobody can believe more
firmly than the philosopher that he will attain the
goal by that journey — because he does not know
where he is to stand if not on the widely spread wings
of all time ; for the disregard of everything present
and momentary lies in the essence of the great philo-
sophic nature. He has truth ; the wheel of time
may roll whither it pleases, never can it escape from
truth. It is important to hear that such men have
lived. Never for example would one be able to
imagine the pride of Heraclitus as an idle possibility.
In itself every endeavour after knowledge seems by
its nature to be eternally unsatisfied and unsatis-
factory. Therefore nobody unless instructed by
history will like to believe in such a royal self-
esteem and conviction of being the only wooer of
truth. Such men live in their own solar-system —
one has to look for them there. A Pythagoras, an
Empedocles treated themselves too with a super-
human esteem, yea, with almost religious awe ; but
the tie of sympathy united with the great conviction
of the metempsychosis and the unity of everything
living, led them back to other men, for their welfare
and salvation. Of that feeling of solitude, however,
which permeated the Ephesian recluse of the Artemis
Temple, one can only divine something, when grow-
ing benumbed in the wildest mountain desert. No
paramount feeling of compassionate agitation, no
desire to help, heal and save emanates from him.
He is a star without an atmosphere. His eye,
"directed blazingly inwards, looks outward, for ap-
pearance's sake only, extinct and icy. All around
him, immediately upon the citadel of his pride beat



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY II3

the waves of folly and perversity : with loathing he
turns away from them. But men with a feeling
heart would also shun such a Gorgon monster as cast
out of brass ; within an out-of-the-way sanctuary,
among the statues of gods, by the side of cold com-
posedly-sublime architecture such a being may ap-
pear more comprehensible. As man among men
Heraclitus was incredible ; and though he was seen
paying attention to the play of noisy children, even
then he was reflecting upon what never man thought
of on such an occasion : the play of the great world-
child, Zeus. He had no need of men, not even for
his discernments. He was not interested in all that
which one might perhaps ascertain from them, and
in what the other sages before him had been en-
deavouring to ascertain. He spoke with disdain of
such questioning, collecting, in short "historic" men.
" I sought and investigated myself," he said, with a
word by which one designates the investigation of
an oracle ; as if he and no one else were the true
fulfiller and achiever of the Delphic precept: "Know
thyself"

What he learned from this oracle, he deemed
immortal wisdom, and eternally worthy of explana-
tion, of unlimited effect even in the distance, after
the model of the prophetic speeches of the Sibyl.
It is sufficient for the latest mankind : let the latter
have that expounded to her, as oracular sayings,
which he like the Delphic god " neither enunciates
nor conceals." Although it is proclaimed by him,
" without smiles, finery and the scent of ointments,"
but rather as with " foaming mouth," it must force
its way through the millenniums of the future. For
8



114 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

the world needs truth eternally, therefore she needs
also Heraclitus eternally ; although he has no need
of her. What does his fame matter to him ? — fame
with " mortals ever flowing on ! " as he exclaims
scornfully. His fame is of concern to man, not to
himself; the immortality of mankind needs him, not
he the immortality of the man Heraclitus. That
which he beheld, the doctrine of the Law in the Be-
coming, and of the Play in the Necessity, must hence-
forth be beheld eternally ; he has raised the curtain
of this greatest stage-play.

9

Whereas in every word of Heraclitusareexpressed
the pride and the majesty of truth, but of truth
caught by intuitions, not scaled by the rope-ladder
of Logic, whereas in sublime ecstasy he beholds but
does not espy, discerns but does not reckon, he is
contrasted with his contemporary Parmenides, a
man likewise with the type of a prophet of truth,
but formed as it were out of ice and not out of fire,
and shedding around himself cold, piercing light.

Parmenides once had, probably in his later years,
a moment of the very purest abstraction, undimmed
by any reality, perfectly lifeless ; this moment — un-
Greek, like no other in the two centuries of the
Tragic Age — the product of which is the doctrine of
" Being," became a boundary-stone for his own life,
which divided it into two periods ; at the same time
however the same moment divides the pre-Socratic
thinking into two halves, of which the first might be
called the Anaximandrian, the second the Parmen-
idean. The first period in Parmenides' own philoso-



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY II5

phising bears still the signature of Anaximander ;
this period produced a detailed philosophic-physical
system asanswerto Anaximander'squestions. When
later that icy abstraction-horror caught him, and the
simplest proposition treating of " Being " and " Not-
Being " was advanced by him, then among the many
older doctrines thrown by him upon the scrap heap
was also his own system. However he does not
appear to have lost all paternal piety towards the
strong and well-shapen child of his youth, and he
saved himself therefore by saying : " It is true there
is only one right way ; if one however wants at any
time to betake oneself to another, then my earlier
opinion according to its purity and consequence
alone is right." Sheltering himself with this phrase
he has allowed his former physical system a worthy
and extensive space in his great poem on Nature,
which really was to proclaim the new discernment as
the only signpost to truth. This fatherly regard,
even though an error should have crept in through
it, is a remainder of human feeling, in a nature quite
petrified by logical rigidity and almost changed into
a thinking-machine.

Parmenides, whose personal intercourse with An-
aximander does not seem incredible to me, and
whose starting from Anaximander's doctrine is not
only credible but evident, had the same distrust for
the complete separation of a world which only is,
and a world which only becomes, as had also caught
Heraclitus and led to a denying of " Being " alto-
gether. Both sought a way out from that contrast
and divergence of a dual order of the world. That
leap into the Indefinite, Indefinable, by which once



Il6 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

for all Anaximander had escaped from the realm of
Becoming and from the empirically given qualities
of such realm, that leap did not become an easy
matter to minds so independently fashioned as those
of Heraclitus and Parmenides ; first they endea-
voured to walk as far as they could and reserved
to themselves the leap for that place, where the
foot finds no more hold and one has to leap, in
order not to fall. Both looked repeatedly at that
very world, which Anaximander had condemned in
so melancholy a way and declared to be the place
of wanton crime and at the same time the peni-
tentiary cell for the injustice of Becoming. Contem-
plating this world Heraclitus, as we know already,
had discovered what a wonderful order, regularity
and security manifest themselves in every Becom-
ing ; from that he concluded that the Becoming
could not be anything evil and unjust. Quite a
different outlook had Parmenides ; he compared
the qualities one with another, and believed that
they were not all of the same kind, but ought to be
classified under two headings. If for example he
compared bright and dark, then the second quality
was obviously only the negation of the first ; and
thus he distinguished positive and negative qualities,
seriously endeavouring to rediscover and register that
fundamental antithesis in the whole realm of Nature.
His method was the following : He took a few anti-
theses, e.g., light and heavy, rare and dense, active
and passive, and compared them with that typical
antithesis of bright and dark : that which corre-
sponded with the bright was the positive, that which
corresponded with the dark the negative quality. If



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 11/

he took perhaps the heavy and light, the light fell
to the side of the bright, the heavy to the side of
the dark ; and thus " heavy " was to him only the
negation of "light," but the "light" a positive quality.
This method alone shows that he had a defiant apti-
tude for abstract logical procedure, closed against
the suggestions of the senses. The " heavy " seems
indeed to offer itself very forcibly to the senses as
a positive quality ; that did not keep Parmenides
from stamping it as a negation. Similarly he placed
the earth in opposition to the fire, the " cold " in
opposition to the "warm," the "dense" in opposi-
tion to the " rare," the " female" in opposition to the
" male," the " passive " in opposition to the " active,"
merely as negations: so that before his gaze our em-
piric world divided itself into two separate spheres,
into that of the positive qualities — with a bright,
fiery, warm, light, rare, active-masculine character —
and into that of the negative qualities. The latter
express really only the lack, the absence of the
others, the positive ones. He therefore described
the sphere in which the positive qualities are absent
as dark, earthy, cold, heavy, dense and altogether as
of feminine-passive character. Instead of the expres-
sions "positive" and "negative" he used the standing
term "existent" and "non-existent" and had arrived
with this at the proposition, that, in contradiction to
Anaximander, this our world itself contains some-
thing " existent," and of course something " non-
existent." One is not to seek that "existent" out-
side the world and as it were above our horizon ; but
before us, and everywhere in every Becoming, some-
thing " existent " and active is contained.



Il8 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

With that however still remained to him the task of
giving the more exact answer to the question : What
is the Becoming ? and here was the moment where he
had to leap, in order not to fall, although perhaps to
such natures as that of Parmenides, even any leaping
means a falling. Enough ! we get into fog, into the
mysticism oi qualitates occulta, and even a little into
mythology. Parmenides, like Heraclitus, looks at the
general Becoming and Not-remaining and explains
to himself a Passing only thus, that the "Non-Exist-
ent" bore the guilt. For how should the "Existent"
bear the guilt of Passing? Likewise,however,theOri-
ginating,2'.g.,the Becoming, must come about through
the assistance of the " Non-Existent " ; for the "Ex-
istent" is always there and could not of itself first ori-
ginate and it could not explain any Originating, any
Becoming. Therefore the Originating, the Becom-
ing as well as the Passing and Perishing have been
brought about by the negative qualities. But that
the originating "thing" has a content, and the passing
" thing " loses a content, presupposes that the posi-
tive qualities — and that just means that very content
— participate likewise in both processes. In short the
proposition results: "For the Becoming the 'Exist-
ent' as well as the 'Non-Existent' is necessary; when
they co-operate then a Becoming results." But how
come the ''positive" and the "negative" to one an-
other? Should they not on the contrary eternally flee
one another as antitheses and thereby make every
Becoming impossible? Here Parmenides appeals to
a qualitas occulta, to a mystic tendency of the anti-
thetical pairs to approach and attract one another,
and he allegorises that peculiar contrariety by the



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 19

name of Aphrodite, and by the empirically known
relation of the male and female principle. It is the
power of Aphrodite which plays the matchmaker
between the antithetical pair, the "Existent" and
the "Non-Existent" Passion brings together the
antagonistic and antipathetic elements : the result
is a Becoming. When Desire has become satiated,
Hatred and the innate antagonism again drive
asunder the "Existent" and the "Non-Existent" —
then man says : the thing perishes, passes.

10

But no one with impunity lays his profane hands
on such awful abstractions as the " Existent " and
the " Non-Existent " ; the blood freezes slowly as
one touches them. There was a day upon which an
odd idea suddenly occurred to Parmenides, an idea
which seemed to take all value away from his former
combinations, so that he felt inclined to throw them
aside, like a money bag with old worn-out coins.
It is commonly believed that an external impres-
sion, in addition to the centrifugal consequence of
such ideas as " existent " and " non-existent," has
also been co-active in the invention of that day ; this
impression was an acquaintance with the theology
of the old roamer and rhapsodist, the singer of a
mystic deification of Nature, the Kolophonian
Xenophanes. Throughout an extraordinary life
Xenophanes lived as a wandering poet and became
through his travels a well-informed and most in-
structive man who knew how to question and
how to narrate, for which reason Heraclitus reck-
oned him amongst the polyhistorians and above



I20 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

all amongst the "historic" natures, in the sense men-
tioned. Whence and when came to him the mystic
bent into the One and the eternally Resting, nobody
will be able to compute ; perhaps it is only the con-
ception of the finally settled old man, to whom, after
the agitation of his erratic wanderings, and after
the restless learning and searching for truth, the
vision of a divine rest, the permanence of all things
within a pantheistic primal peace appears as the
highest and greatest ideal. After all it seems to
me quite accidental that in the same place in Elea
two men lived together for a time, each of whom
carried in his head a conception of unity ; they
formed no school and had nothing in common which
perhaps the one might have learned from the other
and then might have handed on. For, in the case
of these two men, the origin of that conception of
unity is quite different, yea opposite ; and if either of
them has become at all acquainted with the doctrine
of the other then, in order to understand it at all, he
had to translate it first into his own language. With
this translation however the very specific element of
the other doctrine was lost. Whereas Parmenides
arrived at the unity of the "Existent" purely through
an alleged logical consequence and whereas he span
that unity out of the ideas "Being" and "Not-Being,"
Xenophanes was a religious mystic and belonged,
with that mystic unity, very properly to the Sixth
Century. Although he was no such revolutionising
personality as Pythagoras he had nevertheless in his
wanderings the same bent and impulse to improve,
purify, and cure men. He was the ethical teacher,
but still in the stage of the rhapsodist ; in a later time



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 121

he would have been a sophist. In the daring dis-
approval of the existing customs and valuations he
had not his equal in Greece; moreover he did not,
like Heraclitus and Plato, retire into solitude but
placed himself before the very public, whose exult-
ing admiration of Homer, whose passionate pro-
pensity for the honours of the gymnastic festivals,
whose adoration of stones in human shape, he criti-
cised severely with wrath and scorn, yet not as a
brawling Thersites. The freedom of the individual
was with him on its zenith; and by this almost limit-
less stepping free from all conventions he was more
closely related to Parmenides than by that last divine
unity, which once he had beheld, in a visionary state
worthy of that century. His unity scarcely had ex-
pression and word in common with the one "Being"
of Parmenides, and certainly had not the same origin.
It was rather an opposite state of mind in which
Parmenides found his doctrine of" Being." On that
day and in that state he examined his two co-oper-
ating antitheses, the " Existent '' and the " Non-
Existent," the positive and the negative qualities, of
which Desire and Hatred constitute the world and
the Becoming. He was suddenly caught up, mis-
trusting, by the idea of negative quality, of the "Non-
Existent." For can something which does not exist
be a quality? or to put the question in a broader sense :
can anything indeed which does not exist, exist ?
The only form of knowledge in which we at once put
unconditional trust and the disapproval of which
amounts to madness, is the tautology A = A. But
this very tautological knowledge called inexorably
to him : what does not exist, exists not ! What is, is !



122 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Suddenly he feels upon his life the load of an enor-
mous logical sin ; for had he not always without
hesitation assumed that there were existing negative
qualities, in short a "Non-Existent," that therefore,
to express it by a formula, A = Not-A, which indeed
could only be advanced by the most out and out
perversity of thinking. It is true, as he recollected,
the whole great mass of men judge with the same
perversity ; he himself has only participated in the
general crime against logic. But the same moment
which charges him with this crime surrounds him
with the light of the glory of an invention, he has
found, apart from all human illusion, a principle,
the key to the world-secret, he now descends into
the abyss of things, guided by the firm and fearful
hand of the tautological truth as to " Being."

On the way thither he meets Heraclitus — an un-
fortunate encounter ! Just now Heraclitus' play with
antinomies was bound to be very hateful to him,
who placed the utmost importance upon the severest
separation of" Being" and "Not-Being"; propositions
like this : " We are and at the same time we are not "
— "'Being' and 'Not-Being' is at the same time the
same thing and again not the same thing,'' proposi-
tions through which all that he had just elucidated
and disentangled became again dim and inextric-
able, incited him to wrath. " Away with the men,"
he exclaimed, " who seem to have two heads and
yet know nothing! With them truly everything is
in flux, even their thinking! They stare at things
stupidly, but they must be deaf as well as blind so
to mix up the opposites"! The want of judgment
on the part of the masses, glorified by playful anti-



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 23

nomies and praised as the acme of all knowledge was
to him a painful and incomprehensible experience.

Now he dived into the cold bath of his awful ab-
stractions. That which is true must exist in eternal
presence, about it cannot be said " it was," " it will
be." The " Existent " cannot have become ; for out of
what should it have become ? Out of the " Non-Ex-
istent " ? But that does not exist and can produce
nothing. Out of the " Existent " ? This would not
produce anything but itself The same applies to
the Passing, it is just as impossible as the Becoming,
as any change, any increase, any decrease. On the
whole the proposition is valid : Everything about
which it can be said : " it has been " or " it will be "
does not exist ; about the "Existent" however it can
never be said " it does not exist." The " Existent" is
indivisible, for where is the second power, which
should divide it? It is immovable, for whither should
it move itself? It cannot be infinitely great nor in-
finitely small, for it is perfect and a perfectly given
infinitude is a contradiction. Thus the " Existent " is
suspended, delimited, perfect, immovable, everywhere
equally balanced and such equilibrium equally perfect
at any point, like a globe, but not in a space, for
otherwise this space would be a second " Existent."
But there cannot exist several "Existents," for in
order to separate them, something would have to exist
which was notexisting, an assumption which neutral-
ises itself Thus there exists only the eternal Unity.

If now, however, Parmenides turned back his gaze
to the world of Becoming, the existence of which he
had formerly tried to understand by such ingenious
conjectures, he was wroth at his eye seeing the



124 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Becoming at all, his ear hearing it. " Do not follow
the dim-sighted eyes," now his command runs, " not
the resounding ear nor the tongue, but examine
only by the power of the thought." Therewith he
accomplished the extremely important first critique
of the apparatus of knowledge, although this critique
was still inadequate and proved disastrous in its
consequences. By tearing entirely asunder the
senses and the ability to think in abstractions, i.e.
reason, just as if they were two thoroughly separate
capacities, he demolished the intellect itself, and
incited people to that wholly erroneous separation
of" mind " and "body" which, especially since Plato,
lies like a curse on philosophy. All sense percep-
tions, Parmenides judges, cause only illusions and
their chief illusion is their deluding us to believe that
even the " Non-Existent " exists, that even the Be-
coming has a " Being." All that plurality, diversity
and variety of the empirically known world, the
change of its qualities, the order in its ups and downs,
is thrown aside mercilessly as mere appearance and
delusion ; from there nothing is to be learnt, there-
fore all labour is wasted which one bestows upon
this false, through-and-through futile world, the con-
ception of which has been obtained by being hum-
bugged by the senses. He who judges in such
generalisations as Parmenides did, ceases therewith
to be an investigator of natural philosophy in detail;
his interest in phenomena withers away ; there de-
velops even a hatred of being unable to get rid of
this eternal fraud of the senses. Truth is now to
dwell only in the most faded, most abstract gener-
alities, in the empty husks of the most indefinite



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 25

words, as in a maze of cobwebs ; and by such a
" truth " now the philosopher sits, bloodless as an
abstraction and surrounded by a web of formulae.
The spider undoubtedly wants the blood of its vic-
tims ; but the Parmenidean philosopher hates the
very blood of his victims, the blood of Empiricism
sacrificed by him.


And that was a Greek who " flourished " about the
time of the outbreak of the Ionic Revolution. At
that time it was possible for a Greek to flee out of
the superabundant reality, as out of a mere delusive
schematism of theimaginative faculties — not perhaps
like Plato into the land of the eternal ideas, into the
workshop of the world-creator, in order to feast the
eyes on unblemished, unbreakable primal-forms of
things — but into the rigid death-like rest of the cold-
est and emptiest conception, that of the " Being." We
will indeed beware of interpreting such a remarkable
fact by false analogies. That flight was not a world-
flight in the sense of Indian philosophers ; no deep
religious conviction as to the depravity, transitori-
ness and accursedness of Existence demanded that
flight — that ultimate goal, the rest in the " Being,"
was not striven after as the mystic absorption in
one all-sufficing enrapturing conception which is a
puzzle and a scandal to common men. The thought
of Parmenides bears in itself not the slightest trace
of the intoxicating mystical Indian fragrance, which
is perhaps not wholly imperceptible in Pythagoras
and Empedocles ; the strange thing in that fact, at
this period, is rather the very absence of fragrance,



126 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

colour, soul, form, the total lack of blood, religiosity
and ethical warmth, the abstract-schematic — in a
Greek ! — above all however our philosopher's awful
energy of striving after Certainty, in a mythically
thinking and highly emotional - fantastic age is
quite remarkable. " Grant me but a certainty, ye
gods ! " is the prayer of Parmenides, " and be it, in
the ocean of Uncertainty, only a board, broad enough
to lie on ! Everything becoming, everything lux-
uriant, varied, blossoming, deceiving, stimulating,
living, take all that for yourselves, and give to me
but the single poor empty Certainty ! "

In the philosophy of Parmenides the theme of
ontology forms the prelude. Experience offered
him nowhere a "Being" as he imagined it to himself,
but from the fact that he could conceive of it he
concluded that it must exist ; a conclusion which
rests upon the supposition that we have an organ of
knowledge which reaches into the nature of things
and is independent of experience. The material of
our thinking according to Parmenides does not exist
in perception at all but is brought in from somewhere
else, from an extra-material world to which by
thinking we have a direct access. Against all simi-
lar chains of reasoning Aristotle has already asserted
that existence never belongs to the essence, never
belongs to the nature of a thing. For that very
reason from the idea of "Being" — of which the
essentia precisely is only the " Being " — cannot be
inferred an existentia of the " Being " at all. The
logical content of that antithesis "Being" and "Not-
Being" is perfectly nil, if the object lying at the
bottom of it, if the precept cannot be given from



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 127

which this antithesis has been deduced by abstrac-
tion ; without this going baci< to the precept the
antithesis is only a play with conceptions, through
which indeed nothing is discerned. For the merely
logical criterion of truth, as Kant teaches, namely the
agreement of a discernment with the general and
the formal laws of intellect and reason is, it is true,
the conditio sine qua non, consequently the negative
condition of all truth ; further however logic cannot
go, and logic cannot discover by any touchstone the
error which pertains not to the form but to the
contents. As soon, however, as one seeks the con-
tent for the logical truth of the antithesis : " That
which is, is ; that which is not, is not," one will find
indeed not a simple reality, which is fashioned
rigidly according to that antithesis : about a tree I
can say as well " it is " in comparison with all the
other things, as well " it becomes " in comparison
with itself at another moment of time as finally also
" it is not," e.g., " it is not yet tree," as long as I per-
haps look at the shrub. Words are only symbols for
the relations of things among themselves and to us,
and nowhere touch absolute truth; and now to crown
all, the word "Being" designates only the most
general relation, which connects all things, and so
does the word " Not-Being." If however the Exist-
ence of the things themselves be unprovable, then the
relation of the things among themselves, the so-called
" Being " and " Not-Being," will not bring us any
nearer to the land of truth. By means of words and
ideas we shall never get behind the wall of the rela-
tions, let us say into some fabulous primal cause of
things, and even in the pure forms of the sensitive



128 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

faculty and of the intellect, in space, time and
causality we gain nothing, which might resemble a
" Veritas cBterna." It is absolutely impossible for
the subject to see and discern something beyond
himself, so impossible that Cognition and " Being "
are the most contradictory of all spheres. And if in
the uninstructed naivete oi the then critique of the in-
tellect Parmenides was permitted to fancy that out of
the eternally subjective idea he had come to a " Being-
In-itself," then it is to-day, after Kant, a daring
ignorance, if here and there, especially among badly
informed theologians who want to play the philoso-
pher, is proposed as the task of philosophy: "to
conceive the Absolute by means of consciousness,"
perhaps even in the form : " the Absolute is already
extant, else how could it be sought?" as Hegel has ex-
pressed himself, or with the saying of Beneke : " that
the ' Being' must be given somehow, must be attain-
able for us somehow, since otherwise we could not
even have the idea of Being.'" The idea of "Being"!
As though that idea did not indicate the most miser-
able empiric origin already in the etymology of the
word. For esse means at the bottom : " to breathe,"
if man uses it of all other things, then he transmits
the conviction that he himself breathes and lives by
means of a metaphor, i.e., by means of something
illogical to the other things and conceives of their
Existence as a Breathing according to human ana-
logy. Now the original meaning of the word soon
becomes effaced ; so much however still remains that
man conceives of the existence of other things ac-
cording to the analogy of his own existence, there-
fore anthropomorphically, and at any rate by means



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 29

of an illogical transmission. Even to man, therefore
apart from that transmission, the proposition : " I
breathe, therefore a 'Being' exists" is quite insuf-
ficient since against it the same objection must be
made, as against the ambulo, ergo sum, or ergo est.

12

The other idea, of greater import than that of the
" Existent," and likewise invented already by Par-
menides, although not yet so clearly applied as by
his disciple Zeno is the idea of the Infinite. Nothing
Infinite can exist ; for from such an assumption the
contradictory idea of a perfect Infinitude would
result. Since now our actuality, our existing world
everywhere shows the character of that perfect
Infinitude, our world signifies in its nature a contra-
diction against logic and therewith also against
reality and is deception, lie, fantasma. Zeno especi-
ally applied the method of indirect proof ; he said
for example, " There can be no motion from one
place to another ; for if there were such a motion,
then an Infinitude would be given as perfect, this
however is an impossibility." Achilles cannot catch
up the tortoise which has a small start in a race,
for in order to reach only the point from which the
tortoise began, he would have had to run through
innumerable, infinitely many spaces, viz., first half
of that space, then the fourth, then the sixteenth,
and so on ad infinitum. If he does in fact overtake
the tortoise then this is an illogical phenomenon,
and therefore at any rate not a truth, not a reality,
not real " Being," but only a delusion. For it is never
possible to finish the infinite. Another popular ex-

9



130 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

pression of this doctrine is the flying and yet resting
arrow. At any instant of its flight it has a position ;
in this position it rests. Now would the sum of the
infinite positions of rest be identical with motion ?
Would now the Resting, infinitely often repeated,
be Motion, therefore its own opposite ? The Infinite
is here used as the aquafortis of reality, through it
the latter is dissolved. If however the Ideas are
fixed, eternal and entitative — and for Parmenides
"Being" and Thinking coincide — if therefore the In-
finite can never be perfect, if Rest can never become
Motion, then in fact the arrow has not flown at all ;
it never left its place and resting position ; no
moment of time has passed. Or expressed in an-
otherway : in this so-called yet only alleged Actuality
there exists neither time, nor space, nor motion.
Finally the arrow itself is only an illusion ; for it
originates out of the Plurality, out of the phantas-
magoria of the " Non-One " produced by the senses.
Suppose the arrow had a "Being," then it would be
immovable, timeless, increate, rigid and eternal — an
impossible conception ! Supposing that Motion
was truly real, then there would be no rest, there-
fore no position for the arrow, therefore no space —
an impossible conception ! Supposing that time were
real, then it could not be of an infinite divisibility ;
the time which the arrow needed, would have to
consist of a limited number of time-moments, each
of these moments would have to be an Atomon — an
impossible conception ! All our conceptions, as soon
as their empirically-given content, drawn out of this
concrete world, is taken as a Veritas csterna, lead to
contradictions. If there is absolute motion, then



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 131

there is no space ; if there is absolute space then
there is no motion ; if there is absolute "Being," then
there is no Plurality; if there is an absolute Plurality,
then there is no Unity. It should at least become
clear to us how little we touch the heart of things or
untie the knot of reality with such ideas, whereas
Parmenides and Zeno inversely hold fast to the
truth and omnivalidity of ideas and condemn the
perceptible world as the opposite of the true and
omnivalid ideas, as an objectivation of the illogical
and contradictory. With all their proofs they start
from the wholly undemonstrable, yea improbable
assumption that in that apprehensive faculty we
possess the decisive, highest criterion of " Being" and
"Not- Being," ?>.,of objective reality and its opposite ;
those ideas are not to prove themselves true, to
correct themselves by Actuality, as they are after
all really derived from it, but on the contrary they
are to measure and to judge Actuality, and in case
of a contradiction with logic, even to condemn.
In order to concede to them this judicial competence
Parmenides had to ascribe to them the same" Being,"
which alone he allowed in general as the " Being " ;
Thinking and that one increate perfect ball of the
" Existent " were now no longer to be conceived as
two different kinds of " Being," since there was not
permitted a duality of" Being." Thus the over-risky
flash of fancy had become necessaryto declare Think-
ing and " Being" identical. No form of perceptibility,
no symbol, no simile could possibly be of any help
here ; the fancy was wholly inconceivable, but it
was necessary, yea in the lack of every possibility
of illustration it celebrated the highest triumph over



132 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

the world and the claims of the senses. Thinking
and that clod-like, ball-shaped, through-and-through
dead-massive, and rigid-immovable " Being," must,
according to the Parmenidean imperative, dissolve
into one another and be the same in every respect,
to the horror of fantasy. What does it matter that
this identity contradicts the senses ! This contra-
diction is just the guarantee that such an identity
is not borrowed from the senses.

13

Moreover against Parmenides could be produced
a strong couple of argumenta ad hominein or ex con-
cessis, by which, it is true, truth itself could not be
brought to light, but at any rate the untruth of that
absolute separation of the world of the senses and
the world of the ideas, and the untruth of the iden-
tityof "Being" and Thinking could be demonstrated.
Firstly, if the Thinking of Reason in ideas is real,
then also Plurality and Motion must have reality, for
rational Thinking is mobile ; and more precisely, it is
a motion from idea to idea, therefore within a plur-
ality of realities. There is no subterfuge against
that ; it is quite impossible to designate Thinking
as a rigid Permanence, as an eternally immobile,
intellectual Introspection of Unity. Secondly, if
only fraud and illusion come from the senses, and if in
reality there exists only the real identity of " Being "
and Thinking, what then are the senses themselves ?
They too are certainly Appearance only since they
do not coincide with the Thinking, and their pro-
duct, the world of senses, does not coincide with
" Being." If however the senses themselves are



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 33

Appearance to whom then are they Appearance ?
How can they, being unreal, still deceive? The
" Non-Existent " cannot even deceive. Therefore
the Whence ? of deception and Appearance remains
an enigma, yea, a contradiction. We call these argu-
menta ad hominem : The Objection Of The Mobile
Reason and that of The Origin Of Appearance.
From the first would result the reality of Motion
and of Plurality, from the second the impossibility
of the Parmenidean Appearance, assuming that the
chief-doctrine of Parmenides on the " Being " were
accepted as true. This chief-doctrine however only
says: The "Existent" only has a "Being," the "Non-
Existent " does not exist. If Motion however has
such a " Being," then to Motion applies what applies
to the " Existent " in general : it is increate, eternal,
indestructible, without increase or decrease. But if
the " Appearance " is denied and a belief in it made
untenable, by means of that question as to the
Whence ? of the " Appearance," if the stage of the
so-called Becoming, of change, our many-shaped,
restless, coloured and rich Existence is protected
from the Parmenidean rejection, then it is necessary
to characterise this world of change and alteration
as a su7n of such really existing Essentials, existing
simultaneously into all eternity. Of a change in
the strict sense, of a Becoming there cannot natur-
ally be any question even with this assumption.
But now Plurality has a real " Being," all qualities
have a real "Being" and motion not less; and of any
moment of this world — although these moments
chosen at random lie at a distance of millenniums
from one another — it would have to be possible to



134 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

say : all real Essentials extant in this world are with-
out exception co-existent, unaltered, undiminished,
without increase, without decrease. A millennium
later the world is exactly the same. Nothing has
altered. If in spite of that the appearance of the
world at the one time is quite different from that at
the other time, then that is no deception, nothing
merely apparent, but the effect of eternal motion.
The real "Existent" is moved sometimes thus, some-
times thus : together, asunder, upwards, downwards,
into one another, pell-mell.

14
With this conception we have already taken a step
into the realm of the doctrine of Anaxagoras. By
him both objections against Parmenides are raised
in full strength ; that of the mobile Thinking and
that of the Whence ? of " Appearance " ; but in the
chief proposition Parmenides has subjugated him
as well as all the younger philosophers and nature-
explorers. They all deny the possibility of Becom-
ing and Passing, as the mind of the people conceives
them and as Anaximander and Heraclitus had as-
sumed with greater circumspection and yet still heed-
lessly. Such a mythological Originating out of the
Nothing, such a Disappearing into the Nothing, such
an arbitrary Changing of the Nothing into the Some-
thing, such a random exchanging, putting on and
putting off of the qualities was henceforth considered
senseless ; but so was, and for the same reasons, an
originating of the Many out of the One, of the mani-
fold qualities out of the one primal-quality, in short
the derivation ofthe worldoutof a primary substance,



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 135

as argued by Thales and Heraclitus. Rather was now
the real problem advanced of applying the doctrineof
increate imperishable "Being" to this existing world,
without taking one's refuge in the theory of appear-
ance and deception. But if the empiric world is not
to be Appearance, if the things are not to be derived
out of Nothing and just as little out of the one Some-
thing, then these things must contain in themselves a
real "Being," their matter and content must beuncon-
ditionally real, and all change can refer only to the
form, i.e., to the position, order, grouping, mixing,
separation of these eternally co-existing Essentials.
It is just as in a game of dice ; they are ever the
same dice; but falling sometimes thus, sometimes
thus, they mean to us something different. All older
theories had gone back to a primal element, as womb
and cause of Becoming, be this water, air, fire or the
Indefinite of Anaximander. Against that Anaxa-
goras now asserts that out of the Equal the Unequal
could never come forth, and that out of the one
" Existent " the change could never be explained.
Whether now one were to imagine that assumed
matter to be rarefied or condensed, one would never
succeed by such a condensation or rarefaction in
explaining the problem one would like to explain :
the plurality of qualities. But if the world in fact
is full of the most different qualities then these must,
in case they are not appearance, have a " Being," i.e.,
must be eternal, increate, imperishable and ever co-
existing. Appearance, however, they cannot be,
since the question as to the Whence ? of Appearance
remains unanswered, yea answers itself in the nega-
tive ! The earlier seekers after Truth h^d intended



136 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

to simplify the problem of Becoming by advancing
only one substance, which bore in its bosom the
possibilities of all Becoming ; now on the contrary
it is asserted : there are innumerable substances,
but never more, never less, and never new ones.
Only Motion, playing dice with them throws them
into ever new combinations. That Motion however
is a truth and not Appearance, Anaxagoras proved
in opposition to Parmenides by the indisputable
succession of our conceptions in thinking. We have
therefore in the most direct fashion the insight into
the truth of motion and succession in the fact that
we think and have conceptions. Therefore at any
rate the one rigid, resting, dead " Being " of Par-
menides has been removed out of the way, there
are many " Existents " just as surely as all these
many " Existents " (existing things, substances)
are in motion. Change is motion — but whence
originates motion? Does this motion leave per-
haps wholly untouched the proper essence of those
many independent, isolated substances, and, accord-
ing to the most severe idea of the " Existent,"
must not motion in itself be foreign to them ? Or
does it after all belong to the things themselves?
We stand here at an important decision ; according
to which way we turn, we shall step into the realm
either of Anaxagoras or of Empedocles or of Democ-
ritus. The delicate question must be raised: if there
are many substances, and if these many move, what
moves them ? Do they move one another ? Or is it
perhaps only gravitation ? Or are there magic forces
of attraction and repulsion within the things them-
selves ? Or does the cause of n^otion }ie outside



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 37

these many real substances? Or putting the question
more pointedly : if two things show a succession, a
mutual change of position, does that originate from
themselves ? And is this to be explained mechani-
cally or magically ? Or if this should not be the
case is it a third something which moves them?
It is a sorry problem, for Parmenides would still
have been able to prove against Anaxagoras the
impossibility of motion, even granted that there are
many substances. For he could say : Take two
Substances existing of themselves, each with quite
differently fashioned, autonomous, unconditioned
"Being" — and of such kind are the Anaxagorean sub-
stances — they can never clash together, never move,
never attract one another, there exists between them
no causality, no bridge, they do not come into con-
tact with one another, do not disturb one another,
they do not interest one another, they are utterly
indifferent. The impact then is just as inexplicable
as the magic attraction : that which is utterly foreign
cannot exercise any effect upon another, therefore
cannot move itself nor allow itself to be moved.
Parmenides would even have added : the only way
of escape which is left to you is this, to ascribe
motion to the things themselves ; then however all
that you know and see as motion is indeed only a
deception and not true motion, for the only kind
of motion which could belong to those absolutely
original substances, would be merely an autogenous
motion limited to themselves without any effect.
But you assume motion in order to explain those
effects of change, of the disarrangement in space, of
^Iteration, in short the causalities and relations of



138 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

the things among themselves. But these very effects
would not be explained and would remain as prob-
lematic as ever ; for this reason one cannot conceive
why it should be necessary to assume a motion since
it does not perform that which you demand from it.
Motion does not belong to the nature of things and
is eternally foreign to them.

Those opponents of the Eleatean unmoved Unity
were induced to make light of such an argument by
prejudices of a perceptual character. It seems so
irrefutable that each veritable " Existent " is a space-
filling body, a lump of matter, large or small but in
any case spacially dimensioned; so that two or more
such lumps cannot be in one space. Under this
hypothesis Anaxagoras, as later on Democritus,
assumed that they must knock against each other ;
if in their motions they came by chance upon one
another, that they would dispute the same space with
each other, and that this struggle was the very cause
of all Change. In other words : those wholly isolated,
thoroughly heterogeneous and eternally unalter-
able substances were after all not conceived as being
absolutely heterogeneous but all had in addition to a
specific, wholly peculiar quality, also one absolutely
homogeneous substratum : a piece of space-filling
matter. In their participation in matter they all
stood equal and therefore could act upon one another,
i.e., knock one another. Moreover all Change did
not in the least depend on the heterogeneity of
those substances but on their homogeneity, as matter.
At the bottom of the assumption of Anaxagoras is
a logical oversight ; for that which is the " Existent-
In-Itself" mustbewhollyunconditional andcoherent,



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 39

is therefore not allowed to assume as its cause any-
thing, — whereas all those Anaxagorean substances
have still a conditioning Something : matter, and
already assume its existence ; the substance " Red "
for example was to Anaxagoras not just merely red
in itself but also in a reserved or suppressed way a
piece of matter without any qualities. Only with
this matter the "Red- In- Itself" acted upon other
substances, not with the " Red," but with that which
is not red, not coloured, nor in any way qualitatively
definite. If the "Red" had been taken strictly as
" Red," as the real substance itself, therefore without
that substratum, then Anaxagoras would certainly
not have dared to speak of an effect of the " Red "
upon other substances, perhaps even with the phrase
that the "Red-In-Itself"was transmittingthe impact
received from the " Fleshy- In-Itself" Then it would
be clear that such an " Existent " par excellence could
never be moved.

IS
One has to glance at the opponents of the Eleates,
in order to appreciate the extraordinary advantages
in the assumption of Parmenides. What embarrass-
ments, — from which Parmenides had escaped, —
awaited Anaxagoras and all who believed in a plur-
alityof substances, with the question, Howmanysub-
stances? Anaxagoras made the leap, closed his eyes
and said, " Infinitely many " ; thus he had flown at
least beyond the incredibly laborious proof of a de-
finite number of elementary substances. Since these
"Infinitely Many" had to exist without increase and
unaltered for eternities, in that assumption was given
the contradiction of an infinity to be conceived as



I40 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

completed and perfect. In short, Plurality, Motion,
Infinity driven into flight by Parmenides with the
amazing proposition of the one " Being," returned
from their exile and hurled their projectiles at the
opponents of Parmenides, causing them wounds for
which there is no cure. Obviously those opponents
have no real consciousness and knowledge as to the
awful force of those Eleatean thoughts, " There can
be no time, no motion, no space ; for all these we
can only think of as infinite, and to be more explicit,
firstly infinitely large, then infinitely divisible ; but
everything infinite has no ' Being,' does not exist,"
and this nobody doubts, who takes the meaning of
the word " Being " severely and considers the exist-
ence of something contradictory impossible, e.g., the
existence of a completed infinity. I f however the very
Actuality shows us everything under the form of the
completed infinity then it becomes evident that it
contradicts itself and therefore has no true reality. If
thoseopponents howevershould object: "but in your
thinking itself there does exist succession, therefore
neither could your thinking be real and consequently
could not prove anything," then Parmenides perhaps
like Kant in a similar case of an equal objection
would have answered : " I can, it is true, say my
conceptions follow upon one another, but that means
only that we are not conscious of them unless with-
in a chronological order, i.e., according to the form
of the inner sense. For that reason time is not a
something in itself nor any order or quality objec-
tively adherent to things." We should therefore have
to distinguish between the Pure Thinking, that would
be timeless like the one Parmenidean " Being," and



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 14I

theconsciousness of this thinking, and thelatter would
already translate the thinking into the form of ap-
pearance, i.e., of succession, plurality and motion. It
is probable that Parmenides would have availed him-
self of this loophole ; however, the same objection
would then have to be raised against him which is
raised against Kant by A. Spir (" Thinking And
Reality," 2nd ed., vol. i., pp. 209, &c.). " Now, in the
first place however it is clear, that I cannot know
anything of a succession as such, unless I have the
successive members of the same simultaneously in
my consciousness. Thus the conception of a suc-
cession itself is not at all successive, hence also quite
different from the succession of our conceptions.
Secondly Kant's assumption implies such obvious
absurdities that one is surprised that he could leave
them unnoticed. Caesar and Socrates according to
this assumption are not really dead, they still live
exactly as they did two thousand years ago and only
seem to be dead, as a consequence of an organisation
of my inner sense." Future men already live and if
they do not now step forward as living that organisa-
tion of the " inner sense " is likewise the cause of it.
Here above all other things the question is to be put :
How can the beginning and the end of conscious
life itself, together with all its internal and external
senses, exist merely in the conception of the inner
sense? The fact is indeed this, that one certainly
cannot deny the reality of Change. If it is thrown
out through the window it slips in again through the
keyhole. If one says: " It merely seems to me, that
conditions and conceptions change," — then this very
semblance and appearance itself is something objec-



142 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

tively existing and within it without doubt the suc-
cession has objective reality, some things in it really
do succeed one another. — Besides one must observe
that indeed the whole critique of reason only has
cause and right of existence under the assumption
that to us our conceptions themselves appear exactly
as they are. For if the conceptions also appeared
to us otherwise than they really are, then one would
not be able to advance any solid proposition about
them, and therefore would not be able to accomplish
any gnosiology or any " transcendental " investiga-
tion of objective validity. Now it remains however
beyond all doubt that our conceptions themselves
appear to us as successive."

The contemplation of this undoubted succession
and agitation has now urged Anaxagoras to a
memorable hypothesis. Obviously the conceptions
themselves moved themselves, were not pushed and
had no cause of motion outside themselves. There-
fore he said to himself, there exists a something
which bears in itself the origin and the commence-
ment of motion ; secondly, however, he notices that
this conception was moving not only itself but also
something quite different, the body. He discovers
therefore, in the most immediate experience an effect
of conceptions upon expansive matter, which makes
itself known as motion in the latter. That was to
him a fact; and only incidentally it stimulated him to
explain this fact. Let it suffice that he had a regula-
tive schema for the motion in the world, — this motion
he now understood either as a motion of the true
isolated essences through the Conceptual Principle,
the Nous, or as a motion through a something already



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 43

moved. That with his fundamental assumption the
latter kind, the mechanical transmission of motions
and impacts likewise contained in itself a problem,
probably escaped him ; the commonness and every-
day occurrence of the effect through impact most
probably dulled his eye to the mysteriousness of
impact. On the other hand he certainly felt the
problematic, even contradictory nature of an effect
of conceptions upon substances existing in them-
selves and he also tried therefore to trace this effect
back to a mechanical push and impact which were
considered by him as quite comprehensible. For the
Nous too was without doubt such a substance exist-
ing in itself and was characterised by him as a very
delicate and subtle matter, with the specific quality
of thinking. With a character assumed in this way,
the effect of this matter upon other matter had of
course to be of exactly the same kind as that which
another substance exercises upon a third, i.e., a
mechanical effect, moving by pressure and impact.
Still the philosopher had now a substance which
moves itself and other things, a substance of which
the motion did not come from outside and depended
on no one else : whereas it seemed almost a
matter of indifference how this automobilism was to
be conceived of, perhaps similar to that pushing
themselves hither and thither of very fragile and
small globules of quicksilver. Among all questions
which concern motion there is none more trouble-
some than thequestion as to the beginning of motion.
For if one may be allowed to conceive of all remain-
ing motions as effect and consequences, then never-
theless the first primal motion is still to be explained ;



144 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

for the mechanical motions, the first link of the chain
certainly cannot lie in a mechanical motion, since
that would be as good as recurring to the nonsensical
idea of the causa sui. But likewise it is not feasible
to attribute to the eternal, unconditional things a
motion of their own, as it were from the beginning,
as dowry of their existence. For motion cannot be
conceived without a direction whither and where-
upon, therefore only as relation and condition ; but
a thing is no longer "entitative-in-itself " and "un-
conditional," if according to its nature it refers neces-
sarily to something existing outside of it. In this
embarrassment Anaxagoras thought he had found
an extraordinary help and salvation in that Nous,
automobile and otherwise independent ; the nature
of that Nous being just obscure and veiled enough
to produce the deception about it, that its assumption
also involves that forbidden causa sui. To empiric
observation it is even an established fact that Con-
ception is not a causa sui but the effect of the brain,
yea, it must appear to that observation as an odd
eccentricity to separate the "mind," the product of the
brain, from its causa and still to deem it existing after
this severing. This Anaxagoras did ; he forgot the
brain, its marvellous design, the delicacy and intri-
cacy of its convolutions and passages and he decreed
the " Mind-In-Itself." This "Mind-In-Itself " alone
among all substances had Free-will, — a grand dis-
cernment ! This Mind was able at any odd time to
begin with the motion of the things outside it ; on
the other hand for ages and ages it could occupy
itself with itself — in short Anaxagoras was allowed
to assume a^rj/ moment of motion in some primeval



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 145

age, as the Chalaza of all so-called Becoming ; i.e.,
of all Change, namely of all shifting and rearrang-
ing of the eternal substances and their particles.
Although the Mind itself is eternal, it is in no way
compelled to torment itself for eternities with the
shifting about of grains of matter ; and certainly
there was a time and a state of those matters — it is
quite indifferent whether that time was of long or
short duration — during which the Nous had not
acted upon them, during which they were still un-
moved. That is the period of the Anaxagorean
chaos.

16

The Anaxagorean chaos is not an immediately
evident conception ; in order to grasp it one must
have understood the conception which our philo-
sopher had with respect to the so-called "Becoming."
For in itself the state of all heterogeneous " Ele-
mentary-existences " before all motion would by no
means necessarily result in an absolute mixture of
all " seeds of things," as the expression of Anaxa-
goras runs, an intermixture, which he imagined as a
complete pell-mell, disordered in its smallest parts,
after all these " Elementary-existences " had been,
as in a mortar, pounded and resolved into atoms of
dust, so that now in that chaos, as in an amphora,
they could be whirled into a medley. One might
say that this conception of the chaos did not contain
anything inevitable, that one merely needed rather
to assume any chance position of all those " exist-
ences," but not an infinite decomposition of them ;
an irregular side-by-side arrangement was already
sufficient ; there was no need of a pell-mell, let alone
10



146 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

such a total pell-mell. What therefore put into
Anaxagoras' head that difficult and complex con-
ception ? As already said : his conception of the
empirically given Becoming. From his experience
he drew first a most extraordinary proposition on the
Becoming, and this proposition necessarily resulted
in that doctrine of the chaos, as its consequence.

The observation of the processes of evolution in
nature, not a consideration of an earlier philosophi-
cal system, suggested to Anaxagoras the doctrine,
that All originated from All; this was the conviction
of the natural philosopher based upon a manifold,
and at the bottom, of course, excessively inadequate
induction. He proved it thus : if even the contrary
could originate out of the contrary, e.g., the Black out
of the White, everything is possible ; that however
did happen with the dissolution of white snow
into black water. The nourishment of the body
he explained to himself in this way : that in the
articles of food there must be invisibly small con-
stituents of flesh or blood or bone which during
alimentation became disengaged and united with
the homogeneous in the body. But if All can become
out of All, the Firm out of the Liquid, the Hard out
of the Soft, the Black out of the White, the Fleshy
out of Bread, then also All must be contained in All.
The names of things in that case express only the
preponderance of the one substance over the other
substances to be met with in smaller, often imper-
ceptible quantities. In gold, that is to say, in that
which one designates a potiore by the name " gold,"
there must be also contained silver, snow, bread,
and flesh, but in very small quantities ; the whole



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 147

is called after the preponderating item, the gold-
substance.

But how is it possible, that one substance pre-
ponderates and fills a thing in greater mass than
the others present? Experience shows, that this
preponderance is gradually produced only through
Motion, that the preponderance is the result of a
process, which we commonly call Becoming. On the
other hand, that " All is in All " is not the result of a
process, but, on the contrary, the preliminary condi-
tion of all Becoming and all Motion, and is conse-
quently previous to all Becoming. In other words:
experience teaches, that continually the like is added
to the 1 ike, ^.^., through nourishment, therefore origin-
ally those homogeneous substanceswere not together
and agglomerated, but they were separate. Rather,
in all empiric processes coming before our eyes, the
homogeneous is always segregated from the hetero-
geneous and transmitted {e.g., during nourishment,
the particles of flesh out of the bread, &c.), conse-
quently the pell-mell of the different substances is the
older form of the constitution of things and in point
of time previous to all Becoming and Moving. If
all so-called Becoming is a segregating and presup-
poses a mixture, the question arises, what degree of
intermixture this pell-mell must have had originally.
Although the process of a moving on the part of the
homogeneous to the homogeneous — ?'.«., Becoming —
has already lasted an immense time, one recognises
in spite of that, that even yet in all things remainders
and seed-grains of all other things are enclosed, wait-
ing for their segregation, and one recognises further
that only here and there a preponderance has been



148 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

brought about ; the primal mixture must have been
a complete one, i.e., going down to the infinitely
small, since the separation and unmixing takes up
an infinite length of time. Thereby strict adherence
is paid to the thought : that everything which pos-
sesses an essential " Being " is infinitely divisible,
without forfeiting its specificum.

According to these hypotheses Anaxagoras con-
ceives of the world's primal existence : perhaps as
similar to a dust-like mass of infinitely small, con-
crete particles of which every one is specifically
simple and possesses one quality only, yet so ar-
ranged that every specific quality is represented in
an infinite number of individual particles. Such
particles Aristotle has called Homoiomere in con-
sideration of the fact that they are the Parts, all
equal one to another, of a Whole which is homo-
geneous with its Parts. One would however com-
mit a serious mistake to equate this primal pell-mell
of all such particles, such "seed -grains of things" to
the one primal matter of Anaximander; for the
latter's primal matter called the " Indefinite '' is a
thoroughly coherent and peculiar mass, the former's
primal pell-mell is an aggregate of substances. It
is true one can assert about this Aggregate of Sub-
stances exactly the same as about the Indefinite of
Anaximander, as Aristotle does : it could be neither
white nor grey, nor black, nor of any other colour ;
it was tasteless, scentless, and altogether as a Whole
defined neither quantitatively nor qualitatively : so
far goes the similarity of the Anaximandrian Inde-
finite and the Anaxagorean Primal Mixture. But
disregarding this negative equality they distinguish



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY I49

themselves one from another positively by the latter
being a compound, the former a unity. Anaxagoras
had by the assumption of his Chaos at least so much
to his advantage, that he was not compelled to de-
duce the Many from the One, the Becoming out of
the " Existent."

Of course with his complete intermixture of the
"seeds" he had to admit one exception : the Nous
was not then, nor is It now admixed with any thing.
For if It were admixed with only one " Existent,"
It would have, in infinite divisions, to dwell in
all things. This exception is logically very dubi-
ous, especially considering the previously described
material nature of the Nous, it has something mytho-
logical in itself and seems arbitrary, but was how-
ever, according to Anaxagorean pramissa, a strict
necessity. The Mind, which is moreover infinitely
divisible like any other matter, only not through
other matters but through Itself, has, if It divides
Itself, in dividing and conglobating sometimes in
large, sometimes in small masses. Its equal mass
and quality from all eternity; and that which at this
minute exists as Mind in animals, plants, men, was
also Mind without a more or less, although dis-
tributed in another way a thousand years ago. But
wherever It had a relation to another substance,
there It never was admixed with it, but voluntarily
seized it, moved and pushed it arbitrarily — in short,
ruled it. Mind, which alone has motion in Itself,
alone possesses ruling power in this world and shows
it through moving the grains of matter. But whither
does It move them? Or is a motion conceivable,
without direction, without path ? Is Mind in Its



ISO VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS,

impacts just as arbitrary as it is, with regard to the
time when It pushes, and when It does not push ?
In short, does Chance, i.e.., the blindest option, rule
within Motion? At this boundary we step into
the Most Holy within the conceptual realm of
Anaxagoras.

17
What had to be done with that chaotic pell-mell
of the primal state previous to all motion, so that
out of it, without any increase of new substances
and forces, the existing world might originate, with
its regular stellar orbits, with its regulated forms of
seasons and days, with its manifold beauty and order,
— in short, so that out of the Chaos might come a
Cosmos ? This can be only the effect of Motion, and
of a definite and well-organised motion. This Motion
itself is the means of the Nous, Its goal would be
the perfect segregation of the homogeneous, a goal
up to the present not yet attained, because the dis-
order and the mixture in the beginning was infinite.
This goal is to be striven after only by an enormous
process, not to be realized suddenly by a mythological
stroke of the wand. If ever, at an infinitely distant
point of time, it is achieved that everything homo-
geneous is brought together and the " primal-exist-
ences" undivided are encamped side by side in beauti-
ful order, and every particle has found its comrades
and its home, and the great peace comes about after
the great division and splitting up of the substances,
and there will be no longer anything that is divided
and split up, then the Nous will again return into
Its automobilism and, no longer Itself divided, roam
through the world, sometimes in larger, sometimes



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 15I

in smaller masses, as plant-mind or animal-mind, and
no longer will It take up Its new dwelling-place in
other matter. Meanwhile the task has not been
completed ; but the kind of motion which the Nous
has thought out, in order to solve the task, shows a
marvellous suitableness, for by this motion the task
is further solved in each new moment. For this
motion has the character of concentrically progres-
sive circular motion ; it began at some one point of
the chaotic mixture, in the form of a little gyration,
and in ever larger paths this circular movement tra-
verses all existing " Being," jerking forth everywhere
the homogeneous to the homogeneous. At first this
revolution brings everything Dense to the Dense,
everything Rare to the Rare, and likewise all that
is Dark, Bright, Moist, Dry to their kind ; above
these general groups or classifications there are
again two still more comprehensive, namely Ether,
that is to say everything that is Warm, Bright, Rare,
and Aer, that is to say everything that is Dark,
Cold, Heavy, Firm. Through the segregation of the
ethereal masses from the aerial, there is formed, as
the most immediate effect of that epicycle whose
centre moves along in the circumference of ever
greater circles, a something as in an eddy made in
standing water ; heavy compounds are led towards
the middle and compressed. Just in the same way
that travelling waterspout in chaos forms itself on
the outer side out of the Ethereal, Rare, Bright Con-
stituents, on the inner side out of the Cloudy, Heavy,
Moist Constituents. Then in the course of this pro-
cess out of that Aerial mass, conglomerating in its
interior, water is separated, and again out of the



152 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

water the earthy element, and then out of the
earthy element, under the effect of the awful cold
are separated the stones. Again at some juncture
masses of stone, through the momentum of the rota-
tion, are torn away sideways from the earth and
thrown into the realm of the hot light Ether ; there
in the latter's fiery element they are made to glow
and, carried along in the ethereal rotation, they ir-
radiate light, and as sun and stars illuminate and
warm the earth, in herself dark and cold. The whole
conception is of a wonderful daring and simplicity
and has nothing of that clumsy and anthropomor-
phical teleology, which has been frequently connected
with the name of Anaxagoras. That conception has
its greatness just in this, that it derives the whole
Cosmos of Becoming out of the moved circle, whereas
Parmenides contemplated the true " Existent" as a
resting, dead ball. Once that circle is put into motion
and caused to roll by the Nous, then all the order,
law and beauty of the world is the natural conse-
quence of that first impetus. How very much one
wrongs Anaxagoras if one reproaches him for the
wise abstention from teleology which shows itself in
this conception and talks scornfully of his Nous as
of a deus ex machina. Rather, on account of the
elimination of mythological and theistic miracle-
working and anthropomorphic ends and utilities,
Anaxagoras might have made use of proud words
similar to those which Kant used in his Natural His-
tory of the Heavens. For it is indeed a sublime
thought, to retrace that grandeur of the cosmos and
the marvellous arrangement of the orbits of the stars,
to retrace all that, in all forms to a simple, purely



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 153

mechanical motion and, as it were, to a moved mathe-
matical figure, and therefore not to reduce all that to
purposes and intervening hands of a machine-god,
but only to a kind of oscillation, which, having once
begun, is in its progress necessary and definite, and
effects result which resemble the wisest computation
of sagacity and extremely well thought-out fitness
without being anything of the sort. " I enjoy the
pleasure," says Kant, "' of seeing how a well-ordered
whole produces itself without the assistance of arbi-
trary fabrications, under the impulse of fixed laws of
motion — a well-ordered whole which looks so similar
to that world-system which is ours, that I cannot ab-
stain from considering it to be the same. It seems to
me that one might say here, in a certain sense without
presumption : ' Give me matter and I will build a
world out of it' "


Suppose now, that for once we allow that primal
mixture as rightly concluded, some considerations
especially from Mechanics seem to oppose the
grand plan of the world edifice. For even though
the Mind at a point causes a circular movement
its continuation is only conceivable with great
difficulty, especially since it is to be infinite and
gradually to make all existing masses rotate. As
a matter of course one would assume that the pres-
sure of all the remaining matter would have crushed
out this small circular movement when it had
scarcely begun ; that this does not happen pre-
supposes on the part of the stimulating Nous, that
the latter began to work suddenly with awful force,
or at any rate so quickly, that we must call the



1 54 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

motion a whirl : such a whirl as Democritus him-
self imagined. And since this whirl must be in-
finitely strong in order not to be checked through
the whole world of the Infinite weighing heavily
upon it, it will be infinitely quick, for strength can
manifest itself originally only in speed. On the
contrary the broader the concentric rings are, the
slower will be this motion ; if once the motion could
reach the end of the infinitely extended world, then
this motion would have already infinitely little speed
of rotation. Vice versd, if we conceive of the motion
as infinitely great, i.e., infinitely quick, at the moment
of the very first beginning of motion, then the origi-
nal circle must have been infinitely small ; we get
therefore as the beginning a particle rotated round
itself, a particle with an infinitely small material con-
tent. This however would not at all explain the
further motion ; one might imagine even all particles
of the primal mass to rotate round themselves and
yet the whole mass would remain unmoved and
unseparated. If, however, that material particle
of infinite smallness, caught and swung by the
Nous, was not turned round itself but described
a circle somewhat larger than a point, this would
cause it to knock against other material particles, to
move them on, to hurl them, to make them rebound
and thus gradually to stir up a great and spread-
ing tumult within which, as the next result, that
separation of the aerial masses from the ethereal
had to take place. Just as the commencement of
the motion itself is an arbitrary act of the Nous,
arbitrary also is the manner of this commencement
in so far as the first motion circumscribes a circle of



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY I 55

which the radius is chosen somewhat larger than a
point.

19

Here of course one might ask, what fancy had
at that time so suddenly occurred to the Nous, to
knock against some chance material particle out of
that number of particles and to turn it around in
whirling dance and why that did not occur to It
earlier. Whereupon Anaxagoras would answer :
" The Nous has the privilege of arbitrary action ;
It may begin at any chance time, It depends on It-
self, whereas everything else is determined from
outside. It has no duty, and no end which It
might be compelled to pursue; if It did once begin
with that motion and set Itself an end, this after
all was only — the answer is difficult, Heraclitus
would say — play ! "

That seems always to have been the last solution
or answer hovering on the lips of the Greek. The
Anaxagorean Mind is an artist and in truth the most
powerful genius of mechanics and architecture, creat-
ing with the simplest means the most magnificent
forms and tracks and as it were a mobile architecture,
but always out of that irrational arbitrariness which
lies in the soul of the artist. It is as though Anaxa-
goras was pointing at Phidias and in face of the
immense work of art, the Cosmos, was calling out to
us as he would do in front of the Parthenon : " The
Becoming is no moral, but only an artistic pheno-
menon." Aristotle relates that, to the question what
made life worth living, Anaxagoras had answered :
"Contemplating the heavens and the total order
of the Cosmos." He treated physical things so



156 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

devotionally, and with that same mysterious awe,
which we feel when standing in front of an antique
temple ; his doctrine became a species of free-think-
ing religious exercise, protecting itself through
the odi profanum vulgus et arceo and choosing its
adherents with precaution out of the highest and
noblest society of Athens. In the exclusive com-
munity of the Athenian Anaxagoreans the mytho-
logy of the people was allowed only as a symbolic
language ; all myths, all gods, all heroes were con-
sidered here only as hieroglyphics of the interpreta-
tion of nature, and even the Homeric epic was said
to be the canonic song of the sway of the Nous and
the struggles and laws of Nature. Here and there
a note from this society of sublime free-thinkers
penetrated to the people ; and especially Euripides,
the great and at all times daring Euripides, ever
thinking of something new, dared to let many things
become known by means of the tragic mask, many
things whichpierced like an arrow through the senses
of the masses and from which the latter freed them-
selves only by means of ludicrous caricatures and
ridiculous re-interpretations.

The greatest of all Anaxagoreans however is Peri-
cles, the mightiest and worthiest man of the world ;
and Plato bears witness that the philosophy of An-
axagoras alone had given that sublime flight to the
genius of Pericles. When as a public orator he stood
before his people, in the beautiful rigidity and immo-
bility of a marble Olympian and now, calm, wrapped
in his mantle, with unruffled drapery, without any
change of facial expression, without smile, with a
voice the strong tone of which remained ever the



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 157

same, and when he now spoke in an absolutely un-
Demosthenic but merely Periclean fashion, when
he thundered, struck with Hghtnings, annihilated
and redeemed — then he was the epitome of the
Anaxagorean Cosmos, the image of the Nous, who
has built for Itself the most beautiful and dignified
receptacle, then Pericles was as it were the visible
human incarnation of the building, moving, eliminat-
ing, ordering, reviewing, artistically-undetermined
force of the Mind. Anaxagoras himself said man was
the most rational being or he must necessarily shelter
the Nous within himself in greater fulness than all
other beings, because he had such admirable organs
as his hands ; Anaxagoras concluded therefore, that
that Nous, according to the extent to which It made
Itself master of a material body, was always form-
ing for Itself out of this material the tools cor-
responding to Its degree of power, consequently the
Nous made the most beautiful and appropriate tools,
when It was appearing in his greatest fulness. And
as the most wondrous and appropriate action of the
Nous was that circular primal-motion, since at that
time the Mind was still together, undivided, in Itself,
thus to the listening Anaxagoras the effect of the
Periclean speech often appeared perhaps as a simile
of that circular primal-motion ; for here too he per-
ceived a whirl of thoughts moving itself at first with
awful force but in an orderly manner, which in con-
centric circles gradually caught and carried away the
nearest and farthest and which, when it reached its
end, had reshaped — organising and segregating —
the whole nation.

To the later philosophers of antiquity the way in



IS8 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

which Anaxagoras made use of his Nous for the in-
terpretation of the world was strange, indeed scarcely
pardonable ; to them it seemed as though he had
found a grand tool but had not well understood it and
they tried to retrieve what the finder had neglected.
They therefore did not recognise what meaning the
abstention of Anaxagoras, inspired by the purest
spirit of the method of natural science, had, and that
this abstention first of all in every case puts to itself
the question : " What is the cause of Something " ?
{causa efficiens) — and not " What is the purpose of
Something"? [causa finalis). The Nous has not been
dragged in by Anaxagoras for the purpose of answer-
ing the special question : "What is the cause of motion
and what causes regular motions ? " ; Plato however
reproaches him, that he ought to have, but had not
shown that everything was in its own fashion and its
own place the most beautiful, the best and the most
appropriate. But this Anaxagoras would not have
dared to assert in any individual case, to him the ex-
isting world was not even the most conceivably per-
fect world, for he saw everything originate out of
everything, and he found the segregation of the sub-
stances through the Nous complete and done with,
neither at the end of the filled space of the world
nor in the individual beings. For his understand-
ing it was sufficient that he had found a motion,
which, by simple continued action could create the
visible order out of a chaos mixed through and
through; and he took good care not to put the
question as to the Why? of the motion, as to the
rational purpose of motion. For if the Nous had
to fulfil by means of motion a purpose innate in the



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 59

noumenal essence, then it was no longer in Its free
will to commence the motion at any chance time;
in so far as the Nous is eternal, It had also to be
determined eternally by this purpose, and then no
point of time could have been allowed to exist in
which motion was still lacking, indeed it would have
been logically forbidden to assume a starting point
for motion : whereby again the conception of original
chaos, the basis of the whole Anaxagorean inter-
pretation of the world would likewise have become
logically impossible. In order to escape such diffi-
culties, which teleology creates, Anaxagoras had
always to emphasise and asseverate that the Mind
has free will ; all Its actions, including that of the
primal motion, were actions of the "free will," where-
as on the contrary after that primeval moment the
whole remaining world was shaping itself in a strictly
determined, and more precisely, mechanically deter-
mined form. That absolutely free will however can
be conceived only as purposeless, somewhat after
the fashion of children's play or the artist's bent
for play. It is an error to ascribe to Anaxagoras
the common confusion of the teleologist, who, mar-
velling at the extraordinary appropriateness, at the
agreement of the parts with the whole, especially in
the realm of the organic, assumes that that which
exists for the intellect had also come into existence
through intellect, and that that which man brings
about only under the guidance of the idea of purpose,
must have been brought about by Nature through
reflection and ideas of purpose. (Schopenhauer,
"The World As Will And Idea," vol.ii., SecondBook,
chap. 26 : On Teleology). Conceived in the manner



l6o VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

of Anaxagoras, however, the order and appropriate-
ness of things on the contrary is nothing but the im-
mediate result of a bHnd mechanical motion ; and
only in order to cause this motion, in order to get
for once out of the dead-rest of the Chaos, Anaxa-
goras assumed the free-willed Nous who depends
only on Itself He appreciated in the Nous just
the very quality of being a thing of chance, a chance
agent, therefore of being able to act unconditioned,
undetermined, guided neither by causes nor by
purposes.



Notes for a Continuation

(Early Part of 1873)



II



That this total conception of the Anaxagorean
doctrine must be right, is proved most clearly by
the way in which the successors of Anaxagoras,
the Agrigentine Empedocles and the atomic teacher
Democritus in their counter-systems actually criti-
cised and improved that doctrine. The method of
this critique is more than anything a continued
renunciation in that spirit of natural science men-
tioned above, the law of economy applied to the
interpretation of nature. That hypothesis, which
explains the existing world with the smallest ex-
penditure of assumptions and means is to have pre-
ference : for in such a hypothesis is to be found the
least amount of arbitrariness, and in it free play
with possibilities is prohibited. Should there be
two hypotheses which both explain the world, then
a strict test must be applied as to which of the two
better satisfies that demand of economy. He who
can manage this explanation with the simpler and
more known forces, especially the mechanical ones,
he who deduces the existing edifice of the world out
of the smallest possible number of forces, will always
be preferred to him who allows the more compli-
cated and less-known forces, and these moreover in
greater number, to carry on a world-creating play.
So then we see Empedocles endeavouring to remove
the superfluity of hypotheses from the doctrine of
Anaxagoras.


164 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

The first hypothesis which falls as unnecessary is
that of the Anaxagorean Nous, for its assumption
is much too complex to explain anything so simple
as motion. After all it is only necessary to explain
the two kinds of motion : the motion of a body
towards another, and the motion away from another.



If our present Becoming is a segregating, although
not a complete one, then Empedocles asks : what
prevents complete segregation ? Evidently a force
works against it, i.e., a latent motion of attraction.

Further : in order to explain that Chaos, a force
must already have been at work ; a movement is
necessary to bring about this complicated entangle-
ment.

Therefore periodical preponderance of the one
and the other force is certain. They are opposites.

The force of attraction is still at work ; for other-
wise there would be no Things at all, everything
would be segregated.

This is the actual fact : two kinds of motion.
The Nous does not explain them. On the con-
trary. Love and Hatred ; indeed we certainly see
that these move as well as that the Nous moves.

Now the conception of the primal state under-
goes a change : it is the most blessed. With Anaxa-
goras it was the chaos before the architectural work,
the heap of stones as it were upon the building site.

3
Empedocles had conceived the thought of a tan-
gential force originated by revolution and working



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 1 65

He considered the continuation of the circular
movement according to Anaxagoras impossible. It
would result in a whirls i.e., the contrary of ordered
motion.

If the particles were infinitely mixed, pell-mell,
then one would be able to break asunder the bodies
without any exertion of power,they would not cohere
or hold together, they would be as dust.

The forces, which press the atoms against one
another, and which give stability to the mass, Em-
pedocles calls " Love." It is a molecular force, a
constitutive force of the bodies.

4
Against Anaxagoras.

1. The Chaos already presupposes motion.
2. Nothing prevented the complete segregation.
3. Our bodies would be dust-forms. How can
motion exist, if there are not counter-motions in all
bodies ?

4. An ordered permanent circular motion impos-
sible ; only a whirl. He assumes the whirl itself to
be an effect of the vet/cos. — -aTroppoiat. How do distant
things operate on one another, sun upon earth ? If
everything were still in a whirl, that would be im-
possible. Therefore at least two moving powers :
which must be inherent in Things.

5. Why infinite ovra ? Transgression of experi-
ence. Anaxagoras meant the chemical atoms.
Empedocles tried the assumption of four kinds of



1 66 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

chemical atoms. He took the aggregate states to
be essential, and heat to be co-ordinated. There-
fore the aggregate states through repulsion and
attraction ; matter in four forms.

6. The periodical principle is necessary.

7. With the living beings Empedocles will also
deal still on the same principle. Here also he
denies purposiveness. His greatest deed. With
Anaxagoras a dualism.

S
The symbolism of sexual love. Here as in the
Platonic fable the longing after Oneness shows itself,
and here, likewise, is shown that once a greater unity
already existed ; were this greater unity established,
then this would again strive after a still greater one.
The conviction of the unity of everything living
guarantees that once there was an immense Living
Something, of which we are pieces ; that is probably
the Sphairos itself He is the most blessed deity.
Everything was connected only through love, there-
fore in the highest degree appropriate. Love has been
torn to pieces and splintered by hatred, love has been
divided into her elements and killed — bereft of life.
In the whirl no living individuals originate. Even-
tually everything is segregated and now our period
begins. (He opposes the Anaxagorean Primal Mix-
ture by a Primal Discord.) Love, blind as she is,
with furious haste again throws the elements one
against another endeavouring to see whether she can
bring them back to life again or not. Here and there
she is successful. It continues. A presentiment
originates in the living beings, that they are to strive



EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY 167


after still higher unions than home and the primal
state. Eros. It is a terrible crime to kill life, for
thereby one works back to the Primal Discord.
Some day everything will be again one single life,
the most blissful state.

The Pythagorean-orphean doctrine re-interpreted
in the manner of natural science. Empedocles con-
sciously masters both means of expression, therefore
he is the first rhetor. Political aims.

The double-nature — the agonal and the loving, the
compassionate.

Attempt of the Hellenic total reform.

All inorganic matter has originated out of organic,
it is dead organic matter. Corpse and man.



DEMOCRITUS

The greatest possible simplification of the hypo-
theses.

1. There is motion, therefore vacuum, therefore
a " Non- Existent." Thinking is motion.

2. If there is a " Non-Existent " it must be indi-
visible, i.e., absolutely filled. Division is only ex-
plicable in case of empty spaces and pores. The
" Non-Existent " alone is an absolutely porous thing.

3. The secondary qualities of matter, vd/t<f), not of
Matter-In-Itself

4. Establishment of the primary qualities of
the aro/ua. Wherein homogeneous, wherein hetero-
geneous ?

5. The aggregate-states of Empedocles (four ele-



l68 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

ments) presuppose only the homogeneous atoms,
they themselves cannot therefore be 6vTa.

6. Motion is connected indissolublywith theatoms,
effect of gravity. Epicur. Critique : what does gravity
signify in an infinite vacuum ?

7. Thinking is the motion of the fire-atoms. Soul,
life, perceptions of the senses.

Value of materialism and its embarrassment.
Plato and Democritus.

The hermit-like homeless noble searcher for truth.
Democritus and the Pythagoreans together find
the basis of natural sciences.

What are the causes which have interrupted a
flourishing science of experimental physics in anti-
quity after Democritus ?

7

Anaxagoras has taken from Heraclitus the idea
that in every Becoming and in every Being the
opposites are together.

He felt strongly the contradiction that a body
has many qualities and he pulverised it in the belief
that he had now dissolved it into its true qualities.

Plato : first Heraclitean, later Sceptic : Every-
thing, even Thinking, is in a state of flux.

Brought through Socrates to the permanence of
the good, the beautiful.

These assumed as entitative.

All generic ideals partake of the idea of the good,
the beautiful, and they too are therefore entitative,

being (as the soul partakes of the idea of Life).
The idea is formless.

Through Pythagoras' metempsychosis has been
answered the question : how we can know anything
about the ideas.

Plato's end : scepticism in Parmenides. Refuta-
tion of ideology.

8
CONCLUSION

Greek thought during the tragic age is fessimistic
or artistically optimistic.

Their judgment about life implies more.

The One, flight from the Becoming. Aut unity,
aut artistic play.

Deep distrust of reality : nobody assumes a good
god, who has made everything optime.




I70 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

With Socrates Optimism begins, an optimism no
longer artistic, with teleology and faith in the good
god ; faith in the enlightened good man. Dissolu-
tion of the instincts.

Socrates breaks with the hitherto prevailing know-
ledge and culture ; he intends returning to the old
citizen-virtue and to the State.

Plato dissociates himself from the State, when
he observes that the State has become identical
with the new Culture.

The Socratic scepticism is a weapon against the
hitherto prevailing culture and knowledge.



On Truth and Falsity in their
Ultramoral Sense

(1873)



In some remote corner of the universe, effused into
innumerable solar-systems, there was once a star
upon which clever animals invented cognition. It
was the haughtiest, most mendacious moment in
the history of this world, but yet only a moment.
After Nature had taken breath awhile the star con-
gealed and the clever animals had to die. — Someone
might write a fable after this style, and yet he would
not have illustrated sufficiently, how wretched, i
shadow-like, transitory, purposeless and fanciful 1
the human intellect appears in Nature. There were
eternities during which this intellect did not exist,
and when it has once more passed away there will
be nothing to show that it has existed. For this
intellect is not concerned with any further mission
transcending the sphere of human life. No, it is
purely human and none but its owner and procreator
regards it so pathetically as to suppose that the
world revolves around it. If, however, we and the
gnat could understand each other we should learn
that even the gnat swims through the air with the
same pathos, and feels within itself the flying centre
of the world. Nothing in Nature is so bad or so
insignificant that it will not, at the smallest puff of
that force cognition, immediately swell up like a
balloon, and just as a mere porter wants to have his
admirer, so the very proudest man, the philosopher,

173



174 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

imagines he sees from all sides the eyes of the uni-
verse telescopically directed upon his actions and
thoughts.

It is remarkable that this is accomplished by the
intellect, which after all has been given to the most
unfortunate, the most delicate, the most transient
beings only as an expedient, in order to detain them
for a moment in existence, from which without that
extra-gift they would have every cause to flee as
swiftly as Lessing's son.* That haughtiness con-
nected with cognition and sensation, spreading
blinding fogs before the eyes and over the senses
of men, deceives itself therefore as to the value of
existence owing to the fact that it bears within it-
self the most flattering evaluation of cognition. Its
most general effect is deception ; but even its most
particular effects have something of deception in
their nature.

The intellect, as a means for the preservation of
the individual, develops its chief power in dissimu-
lation ; for it is by dissimulation that the feebler, and

* The German poet, Lessing, had been married for just
a little over one year to Eva Konig. A son was born
and died the same day, and the mother's life was despaired
of. In a letter to his friend Eschenburg the poet wrote :
"... and I lost him so unwillingly, this son ! For he had
so much understanding ! so much understanding ! Do not
suppose that the few hours of fatherhood have made me an
ape of a father ! I know what I say. Was it not under-
standing, that they had to drag him into the world with a
pair of forceps ? that he so soon suspected the evil of this
world ? Was it not understanding, that he seized the first
opportunity to get away from it ? . . . "

Eva Konig died a week later. — Tr.



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 17S

less robust individuals preserve themselves, since it
has been denied them to fight the battle of existence
with horns or the sharp teeth of beasts of prey. In
man this art of dissimulation reaches its acme of
perfection : in him deception, flattery, falsehood and
fraud, slander, display, pretentiousness, disguise,
cloaking convention, and acting to others and to
himself in short, the continual fluttering to and fro
around the one flame — Vanity : all these things are
so much the rule, and the law, that few things are
more incomprehensible than the way in which an
honest and pure impulse to truth could have arisen
among men. They are deeply immersed in illusions
and dream-fancies ; their eyes glance only over the
surface of things and see " forms " ; their sensation
nowhere leads to truth, but contents itself with re-
ceiving stimuli and, so to say, with playing hide-and-
seek on the back of things. In addition to that, at
night man allows his dreams to lie to him a whole
life-time long, without his moral sense ever trying
to prevent them ; whereas men are said to exist who
by the exercise of a strong will have overcome the
habit of snoring. What indeed does man know
about himself? Oh ! that he could but once see
himself complete, placed as it were in an illumin-
ated glass-case ! Does not nature keep secret from
him most things, even about his body, e.g., the con-
volutions of the intestines, the quick flow of the
blood-currents, the intricate vibrations of the fibres,
so as to banish and lock him up in proud, delusive
knowledge ? Nature threw away the key ; and woe
to the fateful curiosity which might be able for a
moment to look out and down through a crevice in



176 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

the chamber of consciousness, and discover that man,
indifferent to his own ignorance, is resting on the
pitiless, the greedy, the insatiable, the murderous,
and, as it were, hanging in dreams on the back of a
tiger. Whence, in the wide world, with this state of
affairs, arises the impulse to truth ?

As far as the individual tries to preserve himself
against other individuals, in the natural state of
things he uses the intellect in most cases only for dis-
simulation ; since, however, man both from necessity
and boredom wants to exist socially and gregariously,
he must needs make peace and at least endeavour
to cause the greatest bellum omnium, contra om.nes to
disappear from his world. This first conclusion of
peace brings with it a something which looks like the
first step towards the attainment of that enigmatical
bent for truth. For that which henceforth is to be
"truth" is now fixed ; that is to say, a uniformly valid
and binding designation of things is invented and
the legislature of language also gives the first laws
of truth : since here, for the first time, originates the
fontrast between truth and falsity. The liar uses
the valid designations, the words, in order to make
the unreal appear as real ; e.g., he says, " I am rich,"
whereas the right designation for his state would be
" poor." He abuses the fixed conventions by con-
venient substitution or even inversion of terms. If
he does this in a selfish and moreover harmful
fashion, society will no longer trust him but will
even exclude him. In this way men avoid not so
much being defrauded, but being injured by fraud.
At bottom, at this juncture too, they hate not decep-
tion, but the evil, hostile consequences of certain



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 1 77

species of deception. 'And it is in a similarly
limited sense only that man desires truth : he covets
the agreeable, life-preserving consequences of truth ;
he is indifferent towards pure, ineffective know-
ledge ; he is even inimical towards truths which
possibly might prove harmful or destroying. And,
moreover, what after all are those conventions op
language? Are they possibly products of know-
ledge, of the love of truth ; do the designations
and the things coincide ? Is language the adequate
expression of all realities ?

Only by means of forgetfulness can man ever
arrive at imagining that he possesses " truth " in
that degree just indicated. If he does not mean to
content himself with truth in the shape of tautology,
that is, with empty husks, he will always obtain
illusions instead of truth. What is a word ? The
expression of a nerve-stimulus in sounds. But to
infer a cause outside us from the nerve-stimulus is
already the result of a wrong and unjustifiable appli-
cation of the proposition of causality. How should
we dare, if truth with the genesis of language, if the
point of view of certainty with the designations had
alone been decisive ; how indeed should we dare to
say : the stone is hard ; as if " hard " was known
to us otherwise ; and not merely as an entirely sub-
jective stimulus ! We divide things according to
genders ; we designate the tree as masculine,* the
plant as feminine :f what arbitrary metaphors!
How far flown beyond the canon of certainty ! We


178 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

speak of a "serpent";* the designation fits nothing
but the sinuosity, and could therefore also apper-
tain to the worm. What arbitrary demarcations!
what one-sided preferences given sometimes to this,
sometimes to that quality of a thing ! The different
languages placed side by side show that with words
truth or adequate expression matters little : for other-
wise there would not be so many languages. The
" Thing-in-itself " (it is just this which would be the
pure ineffective truth) is also quite incomprehensible
to the creator of language and not worth making
' any great endeavour to obtain. He designates only
the relations of things to men and for their expres-
sion he calls to his help the most daring metaphors.
A nerve-stimulus, first transformed into a percept 1
First metaphor ! The percept again copied into
a sound I Second metaphor ! And each time he
leaps completely out of one sphere right into the
midst of an entirely different one. One can imagine
a man who is quite deaf and has never had a sensa-
tion of tone and of music ; just as this man will
possibly marvel at Chladni's sound figures in the
sand, will discover their cause in the vibrations of
the string, and will then proclaim that now he knows
what man calls " tone " ; even so does it happen to
us all with language. When we talk about trees,
colours, snow and flowers, we believe we know some-
thing about the things themselves, and yet we only
possess metaphors of the things,and these metaphors
do not in the least correspond to the original essen-
tials. Just as the sound shows itself as a sand-

* Cf. the German die Schlange and schlingen, the English
serpent from the Latin serpere. — Tr.



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 1/9

figure, in the same way the enigmatical x of the
Thing-in-itself is seen first as nerve-stimulus, then
as percept, and finally as sound. At any rate the
genesis of language did not therefore proceed on
logical lines, and the whole material in which and
with which the man of truth, the investigator, the
philosopher works and builds, originates, if not
from Nephelococcygia, cloud-land, at any rate not

from the essence of things. ,

Let us especially think about the formation of
ideas. Every word becomes at once an idea not
by having, as one might presume, to serve as a
reminder for the original experience happening but
once and absolutely individualised, to which experi-
ence such word owes its origin, no, but by having
simultaneously to fit innumerable, more or less
similar (which really means never equal, therefore
altogether unequal) cases. /Every idea originates
through equating the unequal. As certainly as no
one leaf is exactly similar to any other, so certain
is it that the idea " leaf" has been formed through
an arbitrary omission of these individual differences,
through a forgetting of the differentiating qualities,
and this idea now awakens the notion that in
nature there is, besides the leaves, a something
called the "leaf," perhaps a primal form accord-
ing to which all leaves were woven, drawn, accur-
ately measured, coloured, crinkled, painted, but by
unskilled hands, so that no copy had turned out
correct and trustworthy as a true copy of the primal
form. We call a man " honest " ; we ask, why
has he acted so honestly to-day ? Our customary
answer runs, " On account of his honesty." The



l8o VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Honesty ! That means again : the " leaf " is the cause
of the leaves. We really and truly do not know
anything at all about an essential quality which
might be called the honesty, but we do know about
numerous individualised, and therefore unequal
actions, which we equate by omission of the un-
equal, and now designate as honest actions ; finally
out of them we formulate a qualitas occulta with
the name " Honesty." The disregarding of the indi-
vidual and real furnishes us with the idea, as it like-
wise also gives us the form ; whereas nature knows
of no forms and ideas, and therefore knows no species
but only an x, to us inaccessible and indefinable.
For our antithesis of individual and species is anthro-
pomorphic too and does not come from the essence '
of things, although on the other hand we do not dare
to say that it does not correspond to it ; for that
would be a dogmatic assertion and as such just as
undemonstrable as its contrary.

What therefore is truth ? A mobile army of meta-
phors, metonymies, anthropomorphisms : in short a
sum of human relations which became poetically and
rhetorically intensified, metamorphosed, adorned,
and after long usage seem to a nation fixed, canonic
and binding ; truths are illusions of which one has for-
gotten that they are illusions ; worn-out metaphors
which have become powerless to affect the senses ;
coins which have their obverse effaced and now are
no longer of account as coins but merely as metal.

Still we do not yet know whence the impulse to
truth comes, for up to now we have heard only about
the obligation which society imposes in order to
exist : to be truthful, that is, to use the usual meta-



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 181:

phors, therefore expressed morally : we have heard \
only about the obligation to lie according to a fixed
convention, to lie gregariously in a style binding for
all. Now man of course forgets that matters are going
thus with him ; he therefore lies in that fashion pointed
out unconsciously and according to habits of cen-
turies' standing — and by tkzs very unconsciousness, by
this very forgetting, he arrives at a sense for truth.
Through this feeling of being obliged to designate
one thing as " red," another as " cold," a third one as
" dumb," awakes a moral emotion relating to truth.
Out of the antithesis " liar " whom nobody trusts,
whom all exclude, man demonstrates to himself the
ve nerable ness, reliability, usefulness of truth. Now as
a " rational" belnghe submitFhis actions to the sway
of abstractions ; he no longer suffers himself to be
carried away by sudden impressions, by sensations,
he first generalises all these impressions into paler, '
cooler ideas, in order to attach to them the ship of his
life and actions. Everything which makes man stand <"
out in bold relief against the animal depends on this
faculty of volatilising the concrete metaphors into a
schema, and therefore resolving a perception into an
idea. For within the range of those schemata a
something becomes possible that never could succeed
under the first perceptual impressions : to build up
a pyramidal order with castes and grades, to create
a new world of laws, privileges, sub-orders, delimita-
tions, which now stands opposite the other perceptual
world of first impressions and assumes the appear-
ance of being the more fixed, general, known, human
of the two and therefore the regulating and impera-
tive one. Whereas every metaphor of perception is



1 82 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

individual and without its equal and therefore knows
ihow to escape all attempts to classify it, the great
"edifice of ideas shows the rigid regularity of a Roman
Columbarium and in logic breathes forth the stern-
ness and coolness which we find in mathematics. He
who has been breathed upon by this coolness will
scarcely believe, that the idea too, bony and hexa-
hedral, and permutable as a die, remains however only
as the residuum of a metaphor, and that the illusion
of the artistic metamorphosis of a nerve-stimulus
into percepts is, if not the mother, then thegr-and--
mother of every idea. Now in this^^ame of .dice,
/ " Truth" means to use every die as it is designated, to
' count its points carefully, to form exact classifications,
and never lo violate the order of castes and the se-
quences of rank. Just as the Romans and Etruscans
for their benefit cut up the sky by means of strong
mathematical lines and banned a god as it were into
a templum, into a space limited in this fashion, so
every nation has above its head such a sky of ideas
divided up mathematically, and it understands the
demand for truth to mean that every conceptual god
is to be looked for only in his own sphere. One may
here well admire man, who succeeded in piling up an
infinitelycomplexdomeof ideas on amovable founda-
tion and as it were on running water, as a powerful
genius of architecture. Of course in order to obtain
hold on such a foundation it must be as an edifice
piled up out of cobwebs, so fragile, as to be carried
away by the waves : so firm, as not to be blown
asunder by every wind. In this way man as an
architectural genius rises high above the bee ; she
builds with wax, which she brings together out of



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 1 83

nature ; he with the much more delicate material of
ideas, which he must first manufacture within him-
self He is very much to be admired here — but not
on account of his impulse for truth, his bent for pure
cognition of things. M somebody hides a thing be-
hind a bush, seeks it again and finds it in the self-
same place, then there is not much to boast of, re-
specting this seeking and finding ; thus, however,
matters stand with the seeking and finding of "truth"
within the realm of reason. If I make the definition
of the mammal and then declare after inspecting a
camel, " Behold a mammal," then no doubt a truth
is brought to light thereby, but it is of very limited
value, I mean it is anthropomorphic through and
through, and does not contain one single point which
is " true-in-itself," real and universally valid, apart
from man. The seeker after such truths seeks at
the bottom only the metamorphosis of the world in
man, he strives for an understanding of the world as
a human-like thing and by his battling gains at best
the feeling of an assimilation. Similarly, as the
astrologer contemplated the stars in the service of
man and in connection with their happiness and
unhappiness, such a seeker contemplates the whole
world as related to man, as the infinitely protracted
echo of an original sound : man ; as the multiplied
copy of the one arch-type : man. His procedure is ~
to apply man as the measure of all things, whereby
he starts from the error of believing that he has these
things immediately before him as pure objects. He
therefore forgets that the original metaphors of per-
ception are metaphors, and takes them for the things^
themselves.



1 84 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

Only by forgetting that primitive world of meta-
phors, only by the congelation and coagulation of an
original mass of similes and percepts pouring forth
as a fiery liquid out of the primal faculty of human
fancy, only by the invincible faith, that this sun, this
window, this table is a truth in itself: in short only'
by the fact that man forgets himself as subject, and
what is more as an artistically creating subject : only
by all this does he live with some repose, safety and
consequence. If he were able to get out of the prison
walls of this faith, even for an instant only, his " self-
consciousness " would be destroyed at once. Already
it costs him some trouble to admit to himself that the
insect and the bird perceive a world different from his
own, and that the question, which of the two world-
perceptions is more accurate, is quite a senseless one,
since to decide this question it would be necessary
to apply the standard of right perception, i.e., to apply
a standard which does not exist. On the whole it
seems to me that the "right perception" — which
would mean the; adequate expression of an object in
the subject — is a nonentity full of contradictions :
for between two utterly different spheres, as between^
subject and object, there is no causality, no accuracy, \
no expression, but at the utmost an cgj^^g/zira/ relation, \
I mean a suggestive metamorphosis, a stammering
translation into quite a distinct foreign language, for
which purpose however there is needed at any rate
an intermediate sphere, an intermediate force, freely
composing and freely inventing. The word " phe-
nomenon " contains many seductions, and on that
account I avoid it as much as possible, for it is not
true that the essence of things appears in the empiric



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 1 85

world. A painter who had no hands and wanted to
express the picture distinctly present to his mind by
the agency of song, would still reveal much more
with this permutation of spheres, than the empiric
world reveals about the essence of things. The very^
relation of a nerve-stimulus to the produced percept
is in itself no necessary one ; but if the same percept
has been reproduced millions of times and has been
the inheritance of many successive generations of
man, and in the end appears each time to all mankind
as the result of the same cause, then it attains finally
for man the same importance as if it were the unique,
necessary percept and as if that relation between
the original nerve-stimulus and the percept pro-
duced were a close relation of causality: just as
a dream eternally repeated, would be perceived and
judged as though real. But the congelation and
coagulation of a metaphor does not at all guaran-
tee the necessity and exclusive justification of that
metaphor.

Surely every human being who is at home with
such contemplations has felt a deep distrust against
any idealism of that kind, as often as he has distinctly
convinced himself of the eternal rigidity, omni-
presence, and infallibility of nature's laws : he has
arrived at the conclusion that as far as we can pene-
trate the heights of the telescopic and the depths of
the microscopic world, everything is quite secure,
complete, infinite, determined, and continuous.
Science will have to dig in these shafts eternally
and successfully and all things found are sure to
have to harmonise and not to contradict one another.
How little does this resemble a product of fancy, for



1 86 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

if it were one it would necessarily betray somewhere
its nature of appearance and unreality. Against this
it may be objected in the first place that if each of us
had for himself a different sensibility, if we ourselves
were only able to perceive sometimes as a bird, some-
times as a worm, sometimes as a plant, or if one of
us saw the same stimulus as red, another as blue, if
a third person even perceived it as a tone, then no-
body would talk of such an orderliness of nature, but
would conceive of her only as an extremely subjec-
tive structure. Secondly, what is, for us in general, a
law of nature ? It is not known in itself but only in

-its effects, that is to say in its relations to other laws
of nature, which again are known to us only as sums
of relations. Therefore all these relations refer only
one to another and are absolutely incomprehensible
to us in their essence; only that which we add: time, ,

I space, i.e., relations of sequence and numbers, are

I really known to us in them. Everything wonderful ,
however, that we marvel at in the laws of nature,
everything that demands an explanation and might
seduce us into distrusting idealism, lies really and
solely in the mathematical rigour and inviolability
of the conceptions of time and space. These how-
ever we produce within ourselves and throw them
forth with that necessity with which the spider spins ;
since we are compelled to conceive all things under
these forms only, then it is no longer wonderful that
in all things we actually conceive none but these
forms : for they all must bear within themselves the

^ laws of number, and this very idea of number is the
most marvellous in all things. All obedience to law

Vwhich impresses us so forcibly in the orbits of stars



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 187

and in chemical processes coincides at the bottom
with those qualities which we ourselves attach to
jthose things, so that it is we who thereby make the
impression upon ourselves. Whence it clearly follows
that that artistic formation of metaphors, with which
every sensation in us begins, already presupposes
those forms,and is therefore only consummated with-
in them ; only out of the persistency of these primal
forms the possibility explains itself, how afterwards -
out of the metaphors themselves a structure of ideas ,
could again be compiled. For the latter is an imita-
tion of the relations of time, space and number in
the realm of metaphors. ^



As we saw, it is language which has worked origin-
ally at the construction of ideas ; in later times it is
science. Just as the bee works at the same time at
the cells and fills them with honey, thus science works
irresistibly at that great columbarium of ideas, the
cemeteryof perceptions, builds ever newer and higher
storeys ; supports, purifies, renews the old cells, and
endeavours above all to fill that gigantic frame-
work and to arrange within it the whole of the em-^
piric world, i.e., the anthropomorphic world. And '
as the man of action binds his life to reason and its
ideas, in order to avoid being swept away and losing
himself, so the seeker after truth builds his hut close
to the towering edifice of science in order to collabor- .
ate with it and to find protection. And he needs pro- '
tection. For there are awful powers which continu-
ally press upon him, and which hold out against
the " truth " of science " truths " fashioned in quite



1 88 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

another way, bearing devices of the most hetero-
geneous character.

That impulse towards the formation of metaphors,
that fundamental impulse of man, which we cannot
reason away for one moment — for thereby we should
reason away man himself — is in truth not defeated
nor even subdued by the fact that out of its evapor-
ated products, the ideas, a regular and rigid new
world has been built as a stronghold for it. This
impulse seeks for itself a new realm of action and
another river-bed, and finds it in Mytkos and more
"generally in Art. This impulse constantly confuses
the rubrics and cells of the ideas, by putting up new
figures of speech, metaphors, metonymies ; it con-
stantly shows its passionate longing for shaping the
existing world of waking man as motley, irregular,
inconsequentially incoherent, attractive, and eter-
nally new as the world of dreams is. For indeed,
waking vnzx\perse is only clear about his being awake
through the rigid and orderly woof of ideas, and it
is for this very reason that he sometimes comes to
believe that he was dreaming when that woof of
ideas has for a moment been torn by Art. Pascal is
quite right, when he asserts, that if the same dream
came to us every night we should be just as much
occupied by it as by the things which we see every
day ; to quote his words, " If an artisan were certain
that he would dream every night for fully twelve
hours that he was a king, I believe that he would be
just as happy as a king who dreams every night for
twelve hours that he is an artisan." The wide-awake
day of a people mystically excitable, let us say of
the earlier Greeks, is in fact through the continually-



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 1 89

working wonder, which the mythos presupposes,
more akin to the dream than to the day of the thinker
sobered by science. If every tree may at some time
talk as a nymph, or a god under the disguise of a
bull, carry away virgins, if the goddess Athene her-
self be suddenly seen as, with a beautiful team, she
drives, accompanied by Pisistratus, through the mar-
kets of Athens — and every honest Athenian did be-
lieve this — at any moment, as in a dream, everything
is possible ; and all nature swarms around man as
if she were nothing but the masquerade of the gods,
who found it a huge joke to deceive man by assuming
all possible forms.

Man himself, however, has an invincible tendency
to let himself be deceived,and he is like one enchanted
with happiness when the rhapsodist narrates to him
epic romances in such a way that they appear real
or when the actor on the stage makes the king appear
more kingly than reality shows him. Intellect, that -
master of dissimulation, is free and dismissed from
his service as slave, so long as It is able to deceive
without injuring, and then It celebrates Its Satur-
nalia. Never is It richer, prouder, more luxuriant,
more skilful and daring ; with a creator's delight It
throws metaphors into confusion, shifts the boundary-
stones of the abstractions, so that for instance 1 1 desig-
nates the stream as the mobile way which carries man
to that place whither he would otherwise go. Now It
has thrown off Its shoulders the emblem of seryitude.
Usually with gloomy officiousness It endeavours to
point out the way to a poor individual coveting exist-
ence, and It fares forth for plunder and booty like
a servant for his master, but now It Itself has be-



igo VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS

come a master and may wipe from Its countenance
the expression of indigence. Whatever It now does,
compared with Its former doings, bears within itself
dissimulation, just as Its former doings bore the
character of distortion. It copies human life, but
takes it for a good thing and seems to rest quite
satisfied with it. That enormous framework and
hoarding of ideas, by clinging to which needy man
saves himself through life, is to the freed intellect
only a scaffolding and a toy for Its most daring feats,
and when It smashes it to pieces, throws it into
confusion, and then puts it together ironically, pair-
ing the strangest, separating the nearest items, then
It manifests that It has no use for those makeshifts
of misery, and that It is now no longer led by ideas
but by intuitions. From these intuitions no regular
road leads into the land of the spectral schemata,
the abstractions ; for them the word is not made,
when man sees them he is dumb, or speaks in for-
bidden metaphors and in unheard-of combinations
of ideas, in order to correspond creatively with the
impression of the powerful present intuition at least
by destroying and jeering at the old barriers of ideas.
There are ages, when the rational and the intui-
tive man stand side by side, the one full of fear of the
intuition, the other full of scorn for the abstraction ;
the latter just as irrational as the former is inartistic.
Both desire to rule over life ; the one by knowing
how to meet the most important needs with foresight,
prudence, regularity; the other as an "over-joyous"
hero by ignoring those needs and taking that life
only as real which simulates appearance and beauty.
Wherever intuitive man, as for instance in the earlier



ON TRUTH AND FALSITY 19I'

history of Greece, brandishes his weapons more
powerfully and victoriously than his opponent, there
under favourable conditions, a culture can develop
and art can establish her rule over life. That dis-
sembling, that denying of neediness, that splendour
of metaphorical notions and especially that direct-
ness of dissimulation accompany all utterances of
such a life. Neither the house of man, nor his way
of walking, nor his clothing, nor his earthen jug sug-
gest that necessity invented them ; it seems as if they
all were intended as the expressions of a sublime
happiness, an Olympic cloudlessness, and as it were
a playing at seriousness. Whereas the man guided
by ideas and abstractions only wards off misfortune
by means of them, without even enforcing for him-
self happiness out of the abstractions ; whereas he
strives after the greatest possible freedom from pains,
the intuitive man dwelling in the midst of culture
has from his intuitions a harvest : besides the ward-
ing off of evil, he attains a continuous in-pouring of
enlightenment, enlivenment and redemption. Of
course when he does suffer, he suffers more : and he
even suffers more frequently since he cannot learn
from experience, but again and again falls into the
same ditch into which he has fallen before. I n suffer-
ing he is just as irrational as in happiness ; he cries
aloud and finds no consolation. How different
matters are in the same misfortune with the Stoic,
taught by experience and ruling himself by ideas !
He who otherwise only looks for uprightness, truth,
freedom from deceptions and shelter from ensnaring
and sudden attack, in his misfortune performs the
masterpiece of dissimulation, just as the other did



IQ2 VARIOUS PROSE ESSAYS



in hW happiness ; he shows no twitching mobile
human face but as it were a mask with dignified,
harmonious features ; he does not cry out and does
not even alter his voice ; when a heavy thundercloud
bursts upon him, he wraps himself up in his cloak
and with slow and measured step walks away from
beneath it.