As it is my intention within a very short time to con-
front my fellow-men with the very greatest demand
that has ever yet been made upon them, it seems to
me above all necessary to declare here who and what
I am. As a matter of fact, this ought to be pretty well
known already, for I have not "held my tongue" about
myself. But the disparity which exists between the
greatness of my task and the smallness of my contem-
poraries, is revealed by the fact that people have
neither heard me nor yet seen me. I live on my own
self-made credit, and it is probably only a prejudice to
suppose that I am alive at all. I do but require to
speak to any one of the scholars who come to the
Ober-Engadine in the summer in order to convince
myself that I am not alive. . . . Under these circum-
stances, it is a duty — and one against which my cus-
tomary reserve, and to a still greater degree the pride
of my instincts, rebel — to say : Listen! for I am such
and such a person. For Heaven's sake do not confound
me with any one else 1



I am, for instance, in no wise a bogey man, or moral
monster. On the contrary, I am the very opposite in



4 PREFACE

nature to the kind of man that has been honoured
hitherto as virtuous. Between ourselves it seems to
me that this is precisely a matter on which I may feel
proud. I am a disciple of the philosopher Dionysus,
and I would prefer to be even a satyr than a saint.
But just read this book ! Maybe I have here suc-
ceeded in expressing this contrast in a cheerful and at
the same time sympathetic manner — maybe this is the
only purpose of the present work.

The very last thing I should promise to accomplish
would be to "improve" mankind. I do not set up any
new idols ; may old idols only learn what it costs to
have legs of clay. To overthrow idols (idols is the
name I give to all ideals) is much more like my busi-
ness. In proportion as an ideal world has been falsely
assumed, reality has been robbed of its value, its
meaning, and its truthfulness. . . . The "true world"
and the "apparent world" — in plain English, the ficti-
tious world and reality. . . . Hitherto the lie of the
ideal has been the curse of reality ; by means of it the
very source of mankind's instincts has become menda-
cious and false ; so much so that those values have
come to be worshipped which are the exact opposite of
the ones which would ensure man's prosperity, his
future, and his great right to a future.



He who knows how to beathe in the air of my writ-
ings is conscious that it is the air of the heights, that
it is bracing. A man must be built for it, otherwise
the chances are that it will chill him. The ice is near,
the loneliness is terrible — but how serenely everything



PREFACE 5

lies in the sunshine ! how freely one can breathe ! how
much, one feels, lies beneath one ! Philosophy, as I
have understood it hitherto, is a voluntary retirement
into regions of ice and mountain-peaks — the seeking-
out of everything strange and questionable in exist-
ence, everything upon which, hitherto, morality has set
its ban. Through long experience, derived from such
wanderings in forbidden country, I acquired an opinion
very different from that which may seem generally
desirable, of the causes which hitherto have led to
men's moralising and idealising. The secret history
of philosophers, the psychology of their great names,
was revealed to me. How much truth can a certain
mind endure ; how much truth can it dare ? — these
questions became for me ever more and more the
actual test of values. Error (the belief in the ideal) is
not blindness ; error is cowardice. . . . Every con-
quest, every step forward in knowledge, is the outcome
of courage, of hardness towards one's self, of cleanli-
ness towards one's self. I do not refute ideals ; all I
do is to draw on my gloves in their presence. . . .
Nitimur in vetitum : with this device my philosophy
will one day be victorious ; for that which has hitherto
been most stringently forbidden is, without exception.
Truth.



In my lifework, my Zarathustra holds a place apart.
With it, I gave my fellow-men the greatest gift that has
ever been bestowed upon them. This book, the voice
of which speaks out across the ages, is not only the
loftiest book on earth, literally the book of mountain



b PREFACE

air, — the whole phenomenon, mankind, lies at an incal-
culable distance beneath it, — but it is also the deepest
book, born of the inmost abundance of truth ; an inex-
haustible well, into which no pitcher can be lowered
without coming up again laden with gold and with
goodness. Here it is not a "prophet" who speaks,
one of those gruesome hybrids of sickness and Will to
Power, whom men call founders of religions. If a man
would not do a sad wrong to his wisdom, he must above
all give proper heed to the tones — the halcyonic tones
— that fall from the lips of Zarathustra : —

"The most silent words are harbingers of the storm ;
thoughts that come on dove's feet lead the world.

"The figs fall from the trees ; they are good and
sweet, and, when they fall, their red skins are rent.
"A north wind am I unto ripe figs.
"Thus, like figs, do these precepts drop down to
you, my friends ; now drink their juice and their sweet
pulp.

"It is autumn all around, and clear sky, and after-
noon."

No fanatic speaks to you here; this is not a "ser-
mon ; " no faith is demanded in these pages. From
out an infinite treasure of light and well of joy, drop
by drop, my words fall out — a slow and gentle gait in
the cadence of these discourses. Such things can
reach only the most elect; it is a rare privilege to be
a listener here ; not every one who likes can have ears
to hear Zarathustra. Is not Zarathustra, because of
these things, a seducer 1 . . . But what, indeed, does
he himself say, when for the first time he goes back to
his solitude? Just the reverse of that which any
"Sage," "Saint," "Saviour of the world," and other



PREFACE 7

decadents would say. . . . Not only his words, but he
himself is other than they.

"Alone do I now go, my disciples ! Get ye also
hence, and alone ! Thus would I have it.

"Verily, I beseech you : take your leave of me and
arm yourselves against Zarathustra ! And better still,
be ashamed of him 1 Maybe he hath deceived you.

"The knight of knowledge must be able not only to
love his enemies, but also to hate his friends.

"The man who remaineth a pupil requiteth his
teacher but ill. And why would ye not pluck at my
wreath ?

" Ye honour me ; but what if your reverence should
one day break down ? Take heed, lest a statue crush
you.

"Ye say ye believe in Zarathustra ? But of what
account is Zarathustra ? Ye are my believers : but of
what account are all believers ?

"Ye had not yet sought yourselves when ye found
me. Thus do all believers ; therefore is all believing
worth so little.

"Now I bid you lose me and find yourselves ; and
only when ye have all denied me will I come back unto
you."

Friedrich Nietzsche.



On this perfect day, when everything is ripening, and
not only the grapes are getting brown, a ray of sun-
shine has fallen on my life : I looked behind me, I
looked before me, and never have I seen so many
good things all at once. Not in vain have I buried
my four-and-fortieth year to-day ; I had the right to
bury it — that in it which still had life, has been saved
and is immortal. The first book of the Transvaluation
of all Values, The Songs of Zarathustra, The Twilight
of the Idols, my attempt to philosophise with the ham-
mer — all these things are the gift of this year, and
even of its last quarter. How could I help being thank-
ful to the whole of my life ?

That is why I am now going to tell myself the story
of my life.



ECCE HOMO



HOW ONE BECOMES WHAT ONE IS



WHY I AM SO WISE



THe happiness of my existence, its unique character
perhaps, consists in its fatefulness: to speak in a
riddle, as my own father I am already dead, as my
own mother I still live and grow old. This double
origin, taken as it were from the highest and lowest
rungs of the ladder of life, at once a decadent and a
beginning, this, if anything, explains that neutrality,
that freedom from partisanship in regard to the general
problem of existence, which perhaps distinguishes me.
To the first indications of ascending or of descending
life my nostrils are more sensitive than those of any man
that has yet lived. In this domain I am a master to my
backbone — I know both sides, for I am both sides.
My father died in his six-and-thirtieth year : he was
delicate, lovable, and morbid, like one who is preor-
dained simply to pay a flying visit — a gracious reminder
of life rather than life itself. In the same year that
his life declined mine also declined : in my six-and-
thirtieth year I reached the lowest point in my vitality,
— I still lived, but my eyes could distinguish nothing
that lay three paces away from me, At that time — it
was the year 1879 — I resigned my professorship at
Bale, lived through the summer like a shadow in St.
Moritz, and spent the following winter, the most sun-
less of my life, like a shadow in Naumburg. This was



lO ECCE HOMO

my lowest ebb. During this period I wrote The Wan-
derer and His Shadow. Without a doubt I was con-
versant with shadows then. The winter that followed,
my first winter in Genoa, brought forth that sweetness
and spirituality which is almost inseparable from ex-
treme poverty of blood and muscle, in the shape of
The Dawn of Day. The perfect lucidity and cheer-
fulness, the intellectual exuberance even, that this work
reflects, coincides, in my case, not only with the most
profound physiological weakness, but also with an
excess of suffering. In the midst of the agony of a
headache which lasted three days, accompanied by
violent nausea, I was possessed of most singular dia-
lectical clearness, and in absolutely cold blood I then
thought out things, for which, in my more healthy
moments, I am not enough of a climber, not sufficiently
supple, not sufficiently cold. My readers perhaps
know to what extent I consider dialectic a symptom of
decadence, as, for instance, in the most famous of all
cases — the case of Socrates. All the morbid disturb-
ances of the intellect, even that semi-stupor which
accompanies fever, have, unto this day, remained com-
pletely unknown to me ; and for my first information
concerning their nature and frequency, I was obliged
to have recourse to the learned works which have been
compiled on the subject. My circulation is slow. No
one has ever been able to detect fever in me. A doc-
tor who treated me for some time as a nerve patient
finally declared : "No ! there is nothing wrong with
your nerves, it is simply I who am nervous,'' It has'
been absolutely impossible to ascertain any local
degeneration in me, nor any organic stomach trouble,
however much I may have suffered from profound



WHY I AM SO WISE II

weakness of the gastric system as the result of general
exhaustion. Even my eye trouble, which sometimes
approached so parlously near to blindness, was only
an effect and not a cause ; for, whenever my general
vital condition improved, my power of vision also
increased. Having admitted all this, do I need to say
that I am experienced in questions of decadence ? I
know them inside and out. Even that filigree art of
prehension and comprehension in general, that feeling
for delicate shades of difference, that psychology of
"seeing through brick walls," and whatever else I may
be able to do, was first learnt then, and is the specific
gift of that period during which everything in me was
subtilised, — observation itself, together with all the
organs of observation. To look upon healthier con-
cepts and values from the standpoint of the sick, and
conversely to look down upon the secret work of
the instincts of decadence from the standpoint of him
who is laden and self-reliant with the richness of life —
this has been my longest exercise, my principal experi-
ence. If in anything at all, it was in this that I
became a master. To-day my hand knows the trick, I
now have the knack of reversing perspectives : the first
reason perhaps why a Transvaluatioti of all Values has
been possible to me alone.



For, apart from the fact that I am a decadent, I am
also the reverse of such a creature. Among other
things my proof of this is, that I always instinctively,
select the proper remedy when my spiritual or bodily



12 ECCE HOMO

health is bad ; whereas the decadent, as such, invaria-
bly chooses those remedies which are bad for him.
As a whole I was sound, but in certain details I was a
decadent. That energy with which I sentenced my-
self to absolute solitude, and to a severance from all
those conditions in life to which I had grown accus-
tomed ; my discipline of myself, and my refusal to
allow myself to be pampered, to be tended hand and
foot, and to be doctored — all this betrays the absolute
certainty of my instincts respecting what at that time
was most needful to me. I placed myself in my own
hands, I restored myself to health: the first condition
of success in such an undertaking, as every physiolo-
gist will admit, is that at bottom a man should be
sound. An intrinsically morbid nature cannot become
healthy. On the other hand, to an intrinsically sound
nature, illness may even constitute a powerful stimulus
to life, to a surplus of life. It is in this light that I
now regard the long period of illness that I endured :
it seemed as if I had discovered life afresh, my own
self included. I tasted all good things and even trifles
in a way in which it was not easy for others to taste
them — out of my Will to Health and to Life I made
my philosophy. . . . For this should be thoroughly
understood ; it was during those years in which my
vitality reached its lowest point that I ceased from
being a pessimist : the instinct of self-recovery forbade
my holding to a philosophy of poverty and despera-
tion. Now, by what signs are Nature's lucky strokes
recognised among men? They are recognised by the
fact that any such lucky stroke gladdens our senses ;
that he is carved from one integral block, which is
hard, sweet, and fragrant as well. He enjoys that



WHY 1 AM SO WISE 13

only which is good for him ; his pleasure, his desire,
ceases when the limits of that which is good for him
are overstepped. He divines remedies for injuries ;
he knows how to turn serious accidents to his own
advantage; that which does not kill him makes him
stronger. He instinctively gathers his material from
all he sees, hears, and experiences. He is a selective
principle ; he rejects much. He is always in his own
company, whether his intercourse be with books, with
men, or with natural scenery ; he honours the things
he chooses, the things he acknowledges, the things he
trusts. He reacts slowly to all kinds of stimuli, with
that tardiness which long caution and deliberate pride
have bred in him — he tests the approaching stimulus ;
he would not dream of meeting it half-way. He be-
lieves neither in "ill-luck" nor "guilt;" he can digest
himself and others ; he knows how to forget — he is
strong enough to make everything turn to his own
advantage.

Lo then ! I am the very reverse of a decadent, for
he whom I have just described is none other than
myself.



This double thread of experiences, this means of
access to two worlds that seem so far asunder, finds
in every detail its counterpart in my own nature — I
am my own double : I have a "second" sight, as well
as a first. And perhaps I also have a third sight.
By the very nature of my origin I was allowed an out-
look beyond all merely local, merely national and lim-
ited horizons ; it required no effort on my part to be a



14 ECCE HOMO

"good European." On the other hand, I am perhaps
more German than modern Germans — mere Imperial
Germans — can hope to be,— I, the last anti-political
German. Be this as it may, my ancestors were Polish
noblemen : it is owing to them that I have so much
race instinct in my blood — who knows ? perhaps even
the liberum veto* When I think of the number of
times in my travels that I have been accosted as a
Pole, even by Poles themselves, and how seldom I
have been taken for. a German, it seems to me as if I
belonged to those only who have a sprinkling of Ger-
man in them. But my mother, Franziska Oehler, is at
any rate something very German ; as is also my pater-
nal grandmother, Erdmuthe Krause. The latter spent
the whole of her youth in good old Weimar, not with-
out coming into contact with Goethe's circle. Her
brother, Krause, the Professor of Theology in Konigs-
berg, was called to the post of General Superintendent
at Weimar after Herder's death. It is not unlikely
that her mother, my great grandmother, is mentioned
in young Goethe's diary under the name of "Muthgen."
She married twice, and her second husband was Su-
perintendent Nietzsche of Eilenburg. In 1813, the
year of the great war, when Napoleon with his general
staff entered Eilenburg on the loth of October, she
gave birth to a son. As a daughter of Saxony she
was a great admirer of Napoleon, and maybe that I am
so still. My father, born in 18 13, died in 1849.



WHY I AM SO WISE 1 5

vious to taking over the pastorship of the parish of
Rocken, not far from Liitzen, he lived for some years
at the Castle of Altenburg, where he had charge of the
education of the four princesses. His pupils are the
Queen of Hanover, the Grand-Duchess Constantine,
the Grand-Duchess of Oldenburg, and the Princess
Theresa of Saxe-Altenburg. He was full of loyal
respect for the Prussian King, Frederick William the
Fourth, from whom he obtained his living at Rocken ;
the events of 1848 saddened him extremely. As I
was born on 15th October, the birthday of the king
above mentioned, I naturally received the HohenzoU-
ern names of Frederick William. There was at all
events one advantage in the choice of this day : my
birthday throughout the whole of my childhood was a
day of public rejoicing. I regard it as a great privi-
lege to have had such a father : it even seems to me
that this embraces all that I can claim in the matter of
privileges — life, the great yea to life, excepted. What
I owe to him above all is this, that I do not need any
special intention, but merely a little patience, in order
involuntarily to enter a world of higher and more deli-
cate things. There I am at home, there alone does
my inmost passion become free. The fact that I had
to pay for this privilege almost with my life, certainly
does not make it a bad bargain. In order to under-
stand even a little of my Zarathiistra, perhaps a man
must be situated and constituted very much as I am
myself — with one foot beyond the realm of the living.



I have never understood the art of arousing ill-feel-
ing against myself, — this is also something for which I



1 6 • ECCE HOMO

have to thank my incomparable father, — even when it
seemed to me highly desirable to do so. However
un-Christian it may seem, I do not even bear any ill-
feeling towards myself. Turn my life about as you
may, you will find but seldom — perhaps indeed only
once — any trace of some one's having shown me ill-
will. You might perhaps discover, however, too many
traces of good-wiW. . . . My experiences even with
those on whom every other man has burnt his fingers,
speak without exception in their favour ; I tame every
bear, I can make even clowns behave decently. Dur-
ing the seven years in which I taught Greek to the
sixth form of the College at Bale, I never had occasion
to administer a punishment; the laziest youths were
diligent in my class. The unexpected has always
found me equal to it ; I must be unprepared in order
to keep my self-command.




WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS

Roughly speaking, I seized two famous and, there-
tofore, completely undefined types by the forelock,
after the manner in which one seizes opportunities,
simply in order to speak my mind on certain questions,
in order to have a few more formulas, signs, and means
of expression at my disposal. Indeed I actually sug-
gest this, with most unearthly sagacity, on page 183
of Schopenhauer as Educator. Plato made use of
Socrates in the same way — that is to say, as a cipher
for Plato. Now that, from some distance, I can look
back upon the conditions of which these essays are the



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 17

testimony, I would be loth to deny that they refer sim-
ply to me. The essay Wagner in Bayreuth is a vision
of my own future ; on the other hand, my most secret
history, my development, is written down in Schopen-
hauer as Educator. But, above all, the vow I made !
What I am to-day, the place I now hold — at a height
from which I speak no longer with words but with
thunderbolts — oh, how far I was from all this in those
days ! But I saw the land — I did not deceive myself
for one moment as to the way, the sea, the danger —
and success ! The great calm in promising, this happy
prospect of a future which must not remain only a
promise ! — In this book every word has been lived,
profoundly and intimately ; the most painful things are
not lacking in it ; it contains words which are posi-
tively running with blood. But a wind of great free-
dom blows over the whole ; even its wounds do not
constitute an objection. As to what I understand by
being a philosopher, — that is to say, a terrible explo-
sive in the presence of which everything is in danger ;
as to how I sever my idea of the philosopher by miles
from that other idea of him which includes even a
Kant, not to speak of the academic "ruminators" and
other professors of philosophy, — concerning all these
things this essay provides invaluable information,
even granting that at bottom, it is not "Schopenhauer
as Educator" but "Nietzsche as Educator," who speaks
his sentiments in it. Considering that, in those days,
my trade was that of a scholar, and perhaps, also, that
I understood my trade, the piece of austere scholar
psychology which suddenly makes its appearance in
this essay is not without importance : it expresses the
feeling of distance, and my profound certainty regard-



1 8 ECCE HOMO

ing what was my real life-task, and what were merely
means, intervals, and accessary work to me. My wis-
dom consists in my having been many things, and in
many places, in order to become one thing — in order
to be able to attain to one thing. It was part of my
fate to be a scholar for a while.



"Human, all-too-Human"



Human, all-too-Human, with its two sequels, is the
memorial of a crisis. It is called a book for free spir-
its : almost every sentence in it is the expression of a
triumph — by means of it I purged myself of everything
in me which was foreign to my nature. Idealism is
foreign to me : the title of the book means : "Where
ye see ideal things I see — human, alas ! all-too-human
things ! "... I know men better. The word "free
spirit" in this book must not be understood as anything
else than a spirit that has become free, that has once
more taken possession of itself. My tone, the pitch
of my voice, has completely changed ; the book will be
thought clever, cool, and at times both hard and
scornful. A certain spirituality, of noble taste, seems
to be ever struggling to dominate a passionate torrent
at its feet. In this respect there is some sense in the
fact that it was the hundredth anniversary of Voltaire's
death that served, so to speak, as an excuse for the
publication of the book as early as 1878. For Vol-
taire, as the opposite of every one who wrote after
him, was above all a grandee of the intellect : pre-



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 1 9

cisely what I am also. The name of Voltaire on one
of my writings — that was verily a step forward — in my
direction. . . . Looking into this book a little more
closely, you perceive a pitiless spirit who knows all the
secret hiding-places in which ideals are wont to skulk
— where they find their dungeons, and, as it were,
their last refuge. With a torch in my hand, the light
of which is not by any means a flickering one, I il-
luminate this nether world with beams that cut like
blades. It is war, but war without powder and smoke,
without warlike attitudes, without pathos and contorted
limbs — all these things would still be "idealism." One
error after the other is quietly laid upon ice ; the ideal
is not refuted — it freezes. Here, for instance, "genius"
freezes ; round the corner the "saint" freezes ; under a
thick icicle the "hero" freezes ; and in the end "faith"
itself freezes. So-called "conviction" and also "pity"
are considerably cooled — and almost everywhere the
" thing in itself" is freezing to death.



This book was begun during the first musical festival
at Bayreuth ; a feeling of profound strangeness towards
everything that surrounded me there, is one of its first
conditions. He who has any notion of the visions
which even at that time had flitted across my path, will
be able to guess what I felt when one day I came to
my senses in Bayreuth. It was just as if I had been
dreaming. Where on earth was I ? I recognised noth-
ing that I saw; I scarcely recognised Wagner. It was
in vain that I called up reminiscences. Tribschen —
remote island of bliss : not the shadow of a resem-



2 ECCE HOMO

blance ! The incomparable days devoted to the laying
of the first stone, the small group of the initiated who
celebrated them, and who were far from lacking fingers
for the handling of delicate things : not the shadow of
a resemblance! What had happened? — Wagner had
been translated into German ! The Wagnerite had
become master of Wagner! — German art! the German
master ! German beer ! . . . We who know only too
well the kind of refined artists and cosmopolitanism in
taste, to which alone Wagner's art can appeal, were
beside ourselves at the sight of Wagner bedecked with
German virtues. I think I know the Wagnerite, I
have experienced three generations of them, from
Brendel of blessed memory, who confounded Wagner
with Hegel, to the "idealists" of the Bayreiith Gazette,
who confounded Wagner with themselves, — I have
been the recipient of every kind of confession about
Wagner, from "beautiful souls." My kingdom for just
one intelligent word ! — In very truth, a blood-curdling
company ! Nohl, Pohl, and Kohl,"^ and others of their
kidney to infinity ! There was not a single abortion
that was lacking among them — no, not even the anti-
Semite. — Poor Wagner ! Into whose hands had he
fallen ? If only he had fallen among swine ! But
among Germans ! Some day, for the edification of
posterity, one ought really to have a genuine Bay-
reuthian stuffed, or, better still, preserved in spirit, —
for it is precisely "spirit" that is lacking in this quarter,
— with this inscription at the foot of the jar : "A sam-
ple of the spirit whereon the 'German Empire' was

* Nohl and Pohl were both writers on music ; Kohl, however,
which literally means cabbage, is a slang expression, denoting
superior nonsense. — Te.



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS' 2 1

founded." . . . But enough ! In the middle of the
festivities I suddenly packed my trunk and left the
place for a few weeks, despite the fact that a charming
Parisian lady sought to comfort me ; I excused myself
to Wagner simply by means of a fatalistic telegram
In a Httle spot called KHngenbrunn, deeply buried in the
recesses of the Bohmerwald, I carried my melancholy
and my contempt of Germans about with me like an
illness — and, from time to time, under the general title
of "The Ploughshare," I wrote a sentence or two down
in my note-book, nothing but severe psychological
stuff, which it is possible may have found its way into
Human, alltoo-Htiman.



That which had taken place in me, then, was not
only a breach with Wagner — I was suffering from a
general aberration of my instincts, of which a mere
isolated blunder, whether it were Wagner or my pro-
fessorship at Bale, was nothing more than a symptom.
I was seized with a fit of impatience with myself ; I
saw that it was high time that I should turn my
thoughts upon my own lot. In a trice I realised, with
appalling clearness, how much time had already been
squandered — how futile and how senseless my whole
existence as a philologist appeared by the side of my
life-task. I was ashamed of this false modesty. . . .
Ten years were behind me, during which, to tell the
truth, the nourishment of my spirit had been at a
standstill, during which I had added not a single use-
ful fragment to my knowledge, and had forgotten
countless things in the pursuit of a hotch-potch of dry-



22 ECCE HOMO

as-dust scholarship. To crawl with meticulous care
and short-sighted eyes through old Greek metricians —
that is what I had come to ! . . . Moved to pity I saw
myself quite thin, quite emaciated : realities were only
too plainly absent from my stock of knowledge, and
what the "idealities" were worth the devil alone knows !
A positively burning thirst overcame me : and from
that time forward I have done literally nothing else
than study physiology, medicine, and natural science —
I even returned to the actual study of history only
when my life-task compelled me to. It was at that
time, too, that I first divined the relation between an
instinctively repulsive occupation, a so-called vocation,
which is the last thing to which one is "called," and
that need of lulling a feeling of emptiness and hunger,
by means of an art which is a narcotic — by means of
Wagner's art, for instance. After looking carefully
about me, I have discovered that a large number of
young men are all in the same state of distress : one
kind of unnatural practice perforce leads to another.
In Germany, or rather, to avoid all ambiguity, in the
Empire,* only too many are condemned to determine
their choice too soon, and then to pine away beneath
a burden that they can no longer throw off. . . , Such
creatures crave for Wagner as for an opiate, — they are
thus able to forget themselves, to be rid of themselves
for a moment. . . . What am I saying ! — for five or
six hours.



* Needless to say, Nietzsche distinguishes sharply between
Bismarckian Germany and that other Germany — Austria, Swit-
zerland, and the Baltic Provinces — where the German language
is also spoken. — Tr.



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 23



At this time my instincts turned resolutely against
any further yielding or following on my part, and any
further misunderstanding of myself. Every kind of
life, the most Cinfavourable circumstances, illness, pov-
erty — anything seemed to me preferable to that undig-
nified "selfishness" into which I had fallen ; in the first
place, thanks to my ignorance and youth, and in which
I had afterwards remained owing to laziness — the so-
called "sense of duty." At this juncture there came
to my help, in a way that I cannot sufficiently admire,
and precisely at the right time, that evil heritage which
I derive from my father's side of the family, and which,
at bottom, is no more than a predisposition to die
young. Illness slowly liberated me from the toils, it
spared me any sort of sudden breach, any sort of vio-
lent and offensive step. At that time I lost not a
particle of the good will of others, but rather added to
my store. Illness likewise gave me the right com-
pletely to reverse my mode of life ; it not only allowed,
it actually commanded, me to forget ; it bestowed upon
me the necessity of lying still, of having leisure, of
waiting, and of exercising patience. . . . But all this
means thinking ! . . . The state of my eyes alone put
an end to all bookwormishness, or, in plain English —
philology : I was thus delivered from books ; for years
I ceased from reading, and this was the greatest boon
I ever conferred upon myself ! That nethermost self,
which was, as it were, entombed, and which had grown
dumb because it had been forced to listen perpetually
to other selves (for that is what reading means !),
slowly awakened ; at first it was shy and doubtful, but



24 ECCE HOMO

at last it spoke again. Never have I rejoiced more
over my condition than during the sickest and most
painful moments of my life. You have only to exam-
ine The Dawn of Day, or, perhaps, The Wanderer and
his Shadow^ in order to understand what this "return
to myself" actually meant; in itself it was the highest
kind of recovery ! . . . My cure was simply the result
of it.



Human, ail-too- Human, this monument of a course
of vigorous self-discipline, by means of which I put an
abrupt end to all the "Superior Bunkum," "Idealism,"
"Beautiful Feelings," and other effeminacies that had
percolated into my being, was written principally in
Sorrento ; it was finished and given definite shape dur-
ing a winter at Bale, under conditions far less favour-
able than those in Sorrento. Truth to tell, it was
Peter Gast, at that time a student at the University of
B^le, and a devoted friend of mine, who was respon-
sible for the book. With my head wrapped in band-
ages, and extremely painful, I dictated while he wrote
and corrected as he went along — to be accurate, he
was the real composer, whereas I was only the author.
When the completed book ultimately reached me, — to
the great surprise of the serious invalid I then was, —
I sent, among others, two copies to Bayreuth. Thanks
to a miraculous flash of intelligence on the part of
chance, there reached me precisely at the same time a
splendid copy of the Parsifal text, with the following
inscription from Wagner's pen: "To his dear friend



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 25

Friedrich Nietzsche, from Richard Wagner, Ecclesias-
tical Councillor." At this crossing of the two books I
seemed to hear an ominous note. Did it not sound as
if two swords had crossed ? At all events we both felt
this was so, for each of us remained silent. At about
this time the first Bayreuth Pamphlets appeared: and
I then understood the move on my part for which it
was high time. Incredible! Wagner had become
pious.



My attitude to myself at that time (1876), and the
unearthly certitude with which I grasped my life-task
and all its world-historic consequences, is well revealed
throughout the book, but more particularly in one very
significant passage, despite the fact that, with my
instinctive cunning, I once more circumvented the use
of the little word "I," — not however, this time, in order
to shed world-historic glory on the names of Schopen-
hauer and Wagner, but on that of another of my friends,
the excellent Dr. Paul Ree — fortunately much too
acute a creature to be deceived — others were less
subtle. Among my readers I have a number of hope-
less people, the typical German professor for instance,
who can always be recognised from the fact that, judg-
ing from the passage in question, he feels compelled to
regard the whole book as a sort of superior Reealism.
As a matter of fact it contradicts five or six of my
friend's utterances : only read the introduction to The
Genealogy of Morals on this question. — The passage
above referred to reads : "What, after all, is the prin-
cipal axiom to which the boldest and coldest thinker,



26 ECCE HOMO

the author of the book On the Origin of Moral Sensa-
tions'^ (read Nietzsche, the first Immoralist), "has
attained by means of his incisive and decisive analysis
of human actions ? 'The moral man,' he says, 'is no
nearer to the intelligible (metaphysical) world than is
the physical man, for there is no intelligible world,'
This theory, hardened and sharpened under the
hammer-blow of historical knowledge" (read The
Trans valuation of all Values), "may some time or
other, perhaps in some future period, — 1890! — serve
as the axe which is applied to the root of the 'metaphy-
sical need' of man, — whether more as a blessing than
a curse to his general welfare it is not easy to say ;
but in any case as a theory with the most important
consequences, at once fruitful and terrible, and look-
ing into the world with that Janus-face which all great
knowledge possesses,"




With this book I open my campaign against morality.
Not that it is at all redolent of powder — you will find
quite other and much nicer smells in it, provided that
you have any keenness in your nostrils. There is
nothing either of light or of heavy artillery in its com-
position, and if its general end be a negative one, its



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 27

means are not so — means out of which the end follows
like a logical conclusion, not like a cannon-shot. And
if the reader takes leave of this book with a feeling of
timid caution in regard to everything which has hither-
to been honoured and even worshipped under the
name of morality, it does not alter the fact that there
is not one negative word, not one attack, and not one
single piece of malice in the whole work — on the con-
trary, it lies in the sunshine, smooth and happy, like a
marine animal, basking in the sun between two rocks.
For, after all, I was this marine animal : almost every
sentence in the book was thought out, or rather caught,
among that medley of rocks in the neighbourhood of
Genoa, where I lived quite alone, and exchanged
secrets with the ocean. Even to this day, when by
chance I happen to turn over the leaves of this book,
almost every sentence seems to me like a hook by
means of which I draw something incomparable out of
the depths ; its whole skin quivers with delicate shud-
ders of recollection. This book is conspicuous for no
little art in gently catching things which whisk rapidly
and silently away, moments which I call godlike
lizards — not with the cruelty of that young Greek god
who simply transfixed the poor little beast ; but never-
theless with something pointed — with a pen. "There
are so many dawns which have not yet shed their
light" — this Indian maxim is written over the doorway
of this book. Where does its author seek that new
morning, that delicate red, as yet undiscovered, with
which another day — ah I a whole series of days, a
whole world of new days ! — will begin ? In the Trans-
valuation of all Values, in an emancipation from all
moral values, in a saying of yea, and in an attitude of



28 ECCE HOMO

trust, to all that which hitherto has been forbidden,
despised, and damned. This yea-saying book projects
its light, its love, its tenderness, over all evil things^ it
restores to them their soul, their clear conscience, and
their superior right and privilege to exist on earth.
Morality is not assailed, it simply ceases to be con-
sidered. This book closes with the word "or ?" — it is
the only book which closes with an "or ?".



My life-task is to prepare for humanity one supreme
moment in which it can come to its senses, a Great
Noon in which it will turn its gaze backwards and
forwards, in which it will step from under the yoke of
accident and of priests, and for the first time set the
question of the Why and Wherefore of humanity as a
whole — this life-task naturally follows out of the con-
viction that mankind does not get on the right road of
its own accord, that it is by no means divinely ruled,
but rather that it is precisely under the cover of its
most holy valuations that the instinct of negation, of
corruption, and of degeneration has held such a seduc-
tive sway. The question concerning the origin of
moral valuations is therefore a matter of the highest
importance to me because it determines the future of
mankind. The demand made upon us to believe that
everything is really in the best hands, that a certain
book, the Bible, gives us the definite and comforting
assurance that there is a Providence that wisely rules
the fate of man, — when translated back into reality
amounts simply to this, namely, the will to stifle the
truth which maintains the reverse of all this, which is



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 29

that hitherto man has been in the worst possible hands,
and that he has been governed by the physiologically
botched, the men of cunning and burning revengeful-
ness, and the so-called "saints" — those slanderers of
the world and traducers of humanity. The definite
proof of the fact that the priest (including the priest
in disguise, the philosopher) has become master, not
only within a certain limited religious community, but
everywhere, and that the morality of decadence, the
will to nonentity, has become morality per se, is to be
found in this : that altruism is now an absolute value,
and egoism is regarded with hostility everywhere. He
who disagrees with me on this point, I regard as
infected. But all the world disagrees with me. To a
physiologist a like antagonism between values admits
of no doubt. If the most insignificant organ within
the body neglects however slightly to assert with
absolute certainty its self-preservative powers, its
recuperative claims, and its egoism, the whole system
degenerates. The physiologist insists upon the removal
of degenerated parts, he denies all fellow-feeling for
such parts, and has not the smallest feeling of pity for
them. But the desire of the priest is precisely the
degeneration of the whole of mankind ; hence his
preservation of that which is degenerate — this is what
his dominion costs humanity. What meaning have
those lying concepts, those handmaids of morality,
"Soul," "Spirit," "Free will," "God," if their aim is not
the physiological ruin of mankind ? When earnestness
is diverted from the instincts that aim at self-preserva-
tion and an increase of bodily energy, /. e. at an increase
of life ; when anaemia is raised to an ideal and the con-
tempt of the body is construed as "the salvation of the



30 ECCE HOMO

soul," what is all this if it is not a recipe for decadence ?
Loss of ballast, resistance offered to natural instincts,
selfishness, in fact — this is what has hitherto been
known as morality. With The Dawn of Day I first
engaged in a struggle against the morality of self-
renunciation.

"Joyful Wisdom :
La Gaya Scienza"



Dawn of Day is a yea-saying book, profound, but
clear and kindly. The same applies once more and
in the highest degree to La Gaya Scienza: in almost
every sentence of this book, profundity and playful-
ness go gently hand in hand. A verse which expresses
my gratitude for the most wonderful month of January
which I have ever lived — the whole book is a gift —
sufficiently reveals the abysmal depths from which
"wisdom" has here become joyful.

"Thou who with cleaving fiery lances
The stream of my soul from its ice dost free,
Till with a rush and a roar it advances
To enter with glorious hoping the sea :
Brighter to see, and purer ever,
Free in the bonds of thy sweet constraint,
So it praises thy wondrous endeavour,
January, thou beauteous saint ! "*

Who can be in any doubt as to what "glorious hop-
ing" means here, when he has realised the diamond



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 3 1

beauty of the first of Zarathustra's words as they
appear in a glow of light at the close of the fourth
book ? Or when he reads the granite sentences at the
end of the third book, where in a fate for all times is first
given a formula ? The songs of Prince Free-as-a-Bird,
which, for the most part, were written in Sicily, remind
me quite forcibly of that Provencal notion of ^^Gaya
Scienza,''^ of that union of singer, knight arid free spirit,
which distinguishes that wonderfully early culture of
the Provencals from all doubtful cultures. The last
poem of all, "To the Mistral," — an exuberant dance
song in which, if you please, the new spirit dances
freely upon the corpse of morality, — is a perfect Pro-
ven^alism.

"Thus Spake Zarathustra :
A Book for All and None"



I now wish to relate the history of Zarathustra.
The fundamental idea of the work, the Eternal Recur-
rence, the highest formula of a Yea-saying to life that
can ever be attained, was first conceived in the month
of August 1881. I made a note of the idea on a
sheet of paper, with the postcript : "Six thousand feet
beyond man and time." That day I happened to be
wandering through the woods alongside of the Lake of
Silvaplana, and I halted not far from Surlei, beside a
huge rock that towered aloft like a pyramid.



32 ECCE HOMO

"I walk among men as among fragments of the
future : of that future which I see.

"And all my creativeness and effort is but this, that
I may be able to think and recast all these fragments
and riddles and dismal accidents into one piece.

"And how could I bear to be a man, if man were
not also a poet, a riddle reader, and a redeemer of
chance !

"To redeem all the past, and to transform 'it was' ,
into 'thus would I have it' — that alone would be my
salvation !"

In another passage he defines as strictly as possible
what to him alone "man" can be, — not a subject for
love nor yet for pity — Zarathustra became master even
of his loathing of man : man is to him a thing unshaped,
raw material, an ugly stone that needs the sculptors'
chisel.

"No longer to will, no longer to value, no longer to
create ! Oh, that this great weariness may never be
mine !

"Even in the lust of knowledge, I feel only the joy
of my will to beget and to grow ; and if there be inno-
cence in my knowledge, it is because my procreative
will is in it.

"Away from God and gods did this will lure me :
what would there be to create if there were gods !

" But to man doth it ever drive me anew, my burn-
ing, creative will. Thus driveth it the hammer to the
stone.

"Alas, ye men, within the stone there sleepeth an
image for me, the image of all my dreams ! Alas, that
it should have to sleep in the hardest and ugliest
stone !



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS ^^

Now rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prisori.
From the stone the fragments fly : what 's that to me ?

"I will finish it : for a shadow came unto me — the
stillest and lightest thing on earth once came unto me !

"The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a
shadow. Alas, my brethren ! What are the — gods to
me now !"

Let me call attention to one last point of view. The
line in italics is my pretext for this remark. A Diony-
sian life-task needs the hardness of the hammer, and
one of its first essentials is without doubt they'cy^ even
of destruction. The command, "harden yourselves 1"
and the deep conviction that all creators are hard, is
the really distinctive sign of a Dionysian nature.

"Beyond Good and Evil : The Prelude to a
Philosophy of the Future"

I

My work for the years that followed was prescribed
as distinctly as possible. Now that the yea-saying part
of my life-task was accomplished, there came the turn
of the negative portion, both in word and deed : the
transvaluation of all values that had existed hitherto,
the great war, — the conjuring-up of the day when the
fatal outcome of the struggle would be decided. Mean-
while, I had slowly to look about me for my peers, for
those who, out of strength, would proffer me a helping
hand in my work of destruction From that time
onward, all my writings are so much bait : maybe I
understand as much about fishing as most people ? If
nothing was caught, it was not I who was at fault.
There were no fish to come and bite.



34 ECCE HOMO



In all its essential points, this book (1886) is a crit-
icism of modernity, embracing the modern sciences,
arts, even politics, together with certain indications as
to a type which would be the reverse of modern man,
or as little like him as possible, a noble and yea-saying
type. In this last respect the book is a school for gen-
tlemen — the term gentleman being understood here in a
much more spiritual and radical sense than it has
implied hitherto. All those things of which the age is
proud, — as, for instance, far-famed "objectivity," "sym-
pathy with all that suffers," "the historical sense," with
its subjection to foreign tastes, with its lying-in-the-
diW'iA.h^ioxQ. petit s f aits, and the rage for science, — are
shown to be the contradiction of the type recommended,
and are regarded as almost ill-bred. If you remember
that this book follows upon Zarathiistra, you may pos-
sibly guess to what system of diet it owes its life. The
eye which, owing to tremendous constraint, has become
accustomed to see at a great distance, — Zarathustra is
even more far-sighted than the Tsar, — is here forced
to focus sharply that which is close at hand, the pres-
ent time, the things that lie about him. In all the
aphorisms and more particularly in the form of this
book, the reader will find the same voluntary turning
away from those instincts which made a Zarathustra a
possible feat. Refinement in form, in aspiration, and
in the art of keeping silent, are its more or less obvi-
ous qualities ; psychology is handled with deliberate
hardness and cruelty, — the whole book does not con-
tain one single good-natured word. . . . All this sort
of thing refreshes a man. Who can guess the kind of



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT ROOKS 35

recreation that is necessary after such an expenditure
of goodness as is to be found in Zarasthustra? From
a theological standpoint — now pay ye heed ; for it is
but on rare occasions that I speak as a theologian — it
was God himself who at the end of his great work,
coiled himself up in the form of a serpent at the foot of
the tree of knowledge. It was thus that he recovered
from being a God. ... He had made everything too
beautiful. . . . The devil is simply God's moment of
idleness, on that seventh day.

"The Genealogy of Morals :
A Polemic"

The three essays which constitute this genealogy
are, as regards expression, aspiration, and the art of
the unexpected, perhaps the most curious things that
have ever been written. Dionysus, as you know, is
also the god of darkness. In each case the beginning
is calculated to mystify ; it is cool, scientific, even
ironical, intentionally thrust to the fore, intentionally
reticent. Gradually less calmness prevails ; here and
there a flash of lightning defines the horizon ; exceed-
ingly unpleasant truths break upon your ears from out
remote distances with a dull, rumbling sound — until
very soon a fierce tempo is attained in which every-
thing presses forward at a terrible degree of tension.
At the end, in each case, amid fearful thunderclaps, a
new truth shines out between thick clouds. The truth
of the first essay is the psychology of Christianity : the
birth of Christianity out of the spirit of resentment, not
as is supposed, out of the "Spirit," — in all its essen-
tials, a counter-movement, the great insurrection against



36 ECCE HOMO

the dominion of noble values. The second essay con-
tains the psychology of conscience : this is not, as you
may believe, "the voice of God in man" ; it is the
instinct of cruelty, which turns inwards once it is una-
ble to discharge itself outwardly. Cruelty is here
exposed, for the first time, as one of the oldest and
most indispensable elements in the foundation of cul-
ture. The third essay replies to the question as to the
origin of the formidable power of the ascetic ideal, of
the priest ideal, despite the fact that this ideal is essen-
tially detrimental, that it is a will to nonentity and to
decadence. Reply : it flourished not because God was
active behind the priests, as is generally believed, but
because it was a faute de mieux — from the fact that
hitherto it has been the only ideal and has had no com-
petitors." For man prefers to aspire to nonentity than
not to aspire at all." But above all, until the time of
Zarathustra there was no such thing as a counter-ideal.
You have understood my meaning. Three decisive
overtures on the part of a psychologist to a Tratisval-
iiatioii of all Values. — ^This book contains the first
psychology of the priest.



"The Twilight of the Idols:
How TO Philosophise with a Hammer"



This work — which covers scarcely one hundred and
fifty pages, with its cheerful and fateful tone, like a
laughing demon, and the production of which occupied



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 37

SO few days that I hesitate to give their number — is
altogether an exception among books : there is no work
more rich in substance, more independent, more upset-
ting — more wicked. If any one should desire to obtain
a more rapid sketch of how everything, before my time,
was standing on its head, he should begin reading me
in this book. That which is called "Idols" on the title
page is simply the old truth that has been believed in
hitherto. In plain English, The Twilight of the Idols
means that the old truth is on its last legs.



There is no reality, no "ideality," which has not been
touched in this book (touched ! what a cautious euphe-
mism !). Not only the eternal idols, but also the
youngest — that is to say, the most senile : modern
ideas, for instance. A strong wind blows between the
trees and in all directions fall the fruit — the truths.
There is the waste of an all-too-rich autumn in this
book : you trip over truths. You even crush some to
death, there are too many of them. Those things that
you can grasp, however, are quite unquestionable ;
they are irrevocable decrees. I alone have the crite-
rion of "truths" in my possession. I alone can decide.
It would seem as if a second consciousness had grown
up in me, as if the "life-will" in me had thrown a light
upon the downward path along which it has been run-
ning throughout the ages. The downward path —
hitherto this had been called the road to "Truth." All
obscure impulse — "darkness and dismay" — is at an
end, the "good man'''' was precisely he who was least



38 ECCE HOMO

aware of the proper way.* And, speaking in all ear-
nestness, no one before me knew the proper way, the
way upwards : only after my time could men once more
find hope, life-tasks, and roads mapped out that lead
to culture — / am the joyful harbinger of this culture.
. . . On this account alone I am also a fatality.



Immediately after the completion of the above-named
work, and without letting even one day go by, I tackled
the formidable task of the Transvaluatioii with a su-
preme feeling of pride which nothing could equal ; and,
certain at each moment of my immortality, I cut sign
after sign upon tablets of brass with the sureness of
Fate. The Preface came into being on 3rd September
1888. When after having written it down I went out
into the open that morning, I was greeted by the most
beautiful day I had ever seen in the Upper Engadine
— clear, glowing with colour, and presenting all the
contrasts and all the intermediary gradations between
ice and the south. I left Sils-Ma.ria only on the 20th
of September. I had been forced to delay my depar-
ture owing to floods, and I was very soon, and for
some days, the only visitor in this wonderful spot, on
which my gratitude bestows the gift of an immortal
name. After a journey that was full of incidents, and

* A witty reference to Goethe's well-known passage in the.
Prologue to Faust: —

"A good man, though in darkness and dismay,
May still be conscious of the proper way."

The words are spoken by the Lord. — Tr.



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 39

not without danger to life, — as for instance at Como,
which was flooded when I reached it in the dead of
night, — I got to Turin on- the afternoon of the 21st.
Turin is the only suitable place for me, and it shall be
my home henceforward. I took the same lodgings as
I had occupied in the spring, 6"^ Via Carlo Alberto,
opposite the mighty Palazzo Carignano, in which Vit-
torio Emanuele was born ; and I had a view of the
Piazza Carlo Alberto and above it across to the hills. ^
Without hesitating, or allowing myself to be disturbed
for a single moment, I returned to my work, only the
last quarter of which had still to be written. On the
30th September, tremendous triumph ; the seventh
day ; the leisure of a god on the banks of the Po.''*'
On the same day, I wrote the Preface to The Tivilight
of the Idols, the correction of the proofs of which pro-
vided me with recreation during the month of Septem-
ber. Never in my life have I experienced such an
autumn ; nor had I ever imagined that such things
were possible on earth — a Claude Lorraine extended
to affinity, each day equal to the last in its wild per-
fection.

"The Case of Wagner :
A Musician's Problem"



In order to do justice to this essay a man ought to
suffer from the fate of music as from an open wound.

?* A wonderful promenade along the banks of the Po, for
which Turin is famous, and of which Nietzsche was particularly
fond.— Tr.



40 ECCE HOMO

— From what do I suffer when I suffer from the fate of
music ? From the fact that music has lost its world-
transfiguring, yea-saying character — that it is decadent
music and no longer the flute of Dionysus. Suppos-
ing, however, that the fate of music be as dear to man
as his own life, because joy and suffering are alike
bound up with it ; then he will find this pamphlet
comparatively mild and full of consideration. To
be cheerful in such circumstances, and laugh good-
naturedly with others at one's self, — ridendo dicere seve-
rum* when the verum dicere would justify every sort
of hardness, — is humanity itself. Who doubts that I,
old artilleryman that I am, would be able if I liked to
point my heavy guns at Wagner ? — Everything decisive
in this question I kept to myself — I have loved Wag-
ner.— After all, an attack upon a more than usually
subtle "unknown person" whom another would not
have divined so easily, lies in the meaning and path of
my life-task. Oh, I have still quite a number of other
"unknown persons" to unmask besides a Cagliostro of
Music! Above all, I have to direct an. attack against
the German people, who, in matters of the spirit, grow
every day more indolent, poorer in instincts, and more
honest ; who, with an appetite for which they are to be
envied, continue to diet themselves on contradictions,
and gulp down "Faith" in company with science. Chris-
tian love together with anti-Semitism, and the will to
power (to the "Empire"), dished up with the gospel of
the humble, without showing the slightest signs of indi-
gestion. Fancy this absence of party-feeling in the
presence of opposites ! Fancy this gastric neutrality



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 41

and "disinterestedness" ! Behold this sense of justice
in the German palate, which can grant equal rights to all,
— which finds everything tasteful ! Without a shadow
of a doubt the Germans are idealists. When I was
last in Germany, I found German taste striving to
grant Wagner and the Trumpeter of Sakkingen* equal
rights; while I myself witnessed the attempts of the
people of Leipzig to do honour to one of the most
genuine and most German of musicians, — using Ger-
man here in the old sense of the word, — a man who
was no mere German of the Empire, the master Hein-
rich Schiitz, by founding a Liszt Society, the object of
which was to cultivate and spread artful {listiget\')
Church music. Without a shadow of doubt the Ger-
mans are idealists.



But here nothing shall stop me from being rude, and
from telling the Germans one or two unpleasant home
truths : who else would do it if I did not .'* I refer to their
laxity in matters historical. Not only have the Germans
entirely lost the breadth of vision which enables one to
grasp the course of culture and the values of culture ; not
only are they one and all political (or Church) puppets ;
but they have also actually put a ban upon this very
breadth of vision. A man must first and foremost be
"German," he must belong to "the race" ; then only can
he pass judgment upon all values and lack of values



42 ECCE HOMO

in history — then only can he establish them. , , . To be
German is in itself an argument, "Germany, Germany
above all,"* is a principle; the Germans stand for the
"moral order of the universe" in history ; compared
with the Roman Empire, they are the upholders of
freedom ; compared with the eighteenth century, they
are the restorers of morality, of the "Categorical Im-
perative." There is such a thing as the writing of
history according to the lights of Imperial Germany ;
there is, I fear, anti-Semitic history — there is also his-
tory written with an eye to the Court, and Herr von
Treitschke is not ashamed of himself. Quite recently
an idiotic opinion in historkis, an observation of Vis-
cher the Swabian aesthete, since happily deceased,
made the rounds of the German newspapers as a
"truth" to which every German must assent. The'
observation was this : "The Renaissance and the
Reformation only together constitute a whole — the
aesthetic rebirth, and the moral rebirth." When I listen
to such things, I lose all patience, and I feel inclined,
I even feel it my duty, to tell the Germans, for once in
a way, all that they have on their conscience. Every
great crime against culture for the last four centuries
lies on their conscience. . . . And always for the same
reason, always owing to their bottomless cowardice in
the face of reality, which is also cowardice in the face
of truth ; always owing to the love of falsehood which
has become almost instinctive in them — in short,
"idealism." It was the Germans who caused Europe
to lose the fruits, the whole meaning of her last period



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 43

of greatness — the period of the Renaissance. At a
moment when a higher order of values, values that
were noble, that said yea to life, and that guaranteed a
future, had succeeded in triumphing over the opposite
values, the values of degeneration, in the very seat of
Christianity itself, — and even in the hearts of those sit-
ting there, — Luther, that cursed monk, not only restored
the Church, but, what was a thousand times worse,
restored Christianity, and at a time too when it lay
defeated. Christianity, the Denial of the Will to Live,
exalted to a religion ! Luther was an impossible monk
who, thanks to his own "impossibility," attacked the
Church, and in so doing restored it ! Catholics would
be perfectly justified in celebrating feasts in honour of
Luther, and in producing festival plays* in his hon-
our. Luther and the "rebirth of morality" ! May all
psychology go to the devil ! Without a shadow of a
doubt the Germans are idealists. On two occasions
when, at the cost of enormous courage and self-con-
trol, an upright, unequivocal, and perfectly scientific
attitude of mind had been attained, the Germans were
able to discover back stairs leading down to the old
"ideal" again, compromises between truth and the
"ideal," and, in short, formulae for the right to reject
science and to perpetrate falsehoods. Leibnitz and
Kant — these two great breaks upon the intellectual
honesty of Europe ! Finally, at a moment when there
appeared on the bridge that spanned ^two centuries of
decadence, a superior force of genius and will which
was strong enough to consolidate Europe and to con-





44 ■ ECCE HOMO

vert it into a political and economic unit, with the
object of ruling the world, the Germans, with their
Wars of Independence, robbed Europe of the signifi-
cance — the marvellous significance, of Napoleon's life.
And in so doing they laid on their conscience every-
thing that followed, everything that exists to-day, — this
sickliness and want of reason which is most opposed
to culture, and which is called Nationalism, — this nev-
rose nationale from which Europe is suffering acutely ;
this eternal subdivision of Europe into petty states,
with politics on a municipal scale: they have robbed
Europe itself of its significance, of its reason, — and
have stuffed it into a cul-de-sac. Is there any one
except me who knows the way out of this cul-de-sac ?
Does anyone except me know of an aspiration which
would be great enough to bind the people of Europe
once more together ?



And after all, why should I not express my suspic-
ions ? In my case, too, the Germans will attempt to
make a great fate give birth merely to a mouse. Up
to the present they have compromised themselves with
me; I doubt whether the future will improve them..
Alas ! how happy I should be to prove a false prophet
in this matter ! My natural readers and listeners are
already Russians, Scandinavians, and Frenchmen —
will they always be the same ? In the history of knowl-
edge, Germans are represented only by doubtful names,
they have been able to produce only '■^unconscious^ ^ swin-
dlers (this word applies to Fichte, Schelling, Schopen-
hauer, Hegel, and Schleiermacher, just as well as to



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 45

Kant or Leibnitz ; they were all mere weavers of
veils).* The Germans must not have the honour of
seeing the first upright intellect in their history of
intellects, that intellect in which truth ultimately got
the better of the fraud of four thousand years, reck-
oned as one with the German intellect. "German
intellect" is my foul air : I breathe with difficulty in
the neighbourhood of this psychological uncleanliness
that has now become instinctive — an uncleanliness
which in every word and expression betrays a German.
They have never undergone a seventeenth century of
hard self-examination, as the French have, — a La
Rochefoucauld, a Descartes, are a thousand times
more upright than the very first among Germans, — the
latter have not yet had any psychologists. But psy-
chology is almost the standard of measurement for the
cleanliness or uncleanliness of a race. . . . For if a
man is not even clean, how can he be deep ? The
Germans are like women, you can scarcely ever
fathom their depths — they haven't any, and that 's the
end of it. Thus they cannot even be called shallow.
That which is called "deep" in Germany, is precisely
this instinctive uncleanliness towards one's self, of
which I have just spoken :, people refuse to be clear in
regard to their own natures. Might I be allowed, per-
haps, to suggest the word "German" as an international
epithet denoting this psychological depravity ? — At the
moment of writing, for instance, the German Emperor
is declaring it to be his Christian duty to liberate the
slaves in Africa ; among us Europeans, then, this would




46 ECCE HOMO

be called simply "German." . . . Have the Germans
ever produced even a book that had depth ? They are
lacking in the mere idea of what constitutes a book. I
have known scholars who thought that Kant was deep.
At the Court of Prussia I fear that Herr von Treitschke
is regarded as deep. And when I happen to praise
Stendhal as a deep psychologist, I have often been
compelled in the company of German University Pro-
fessors, to spell his name aloud.



And why should I not proceed to the end ? I am
fond of clearing the air. It is even part of my ambi-
tion to be considered as essentially a despiser of
Germans. I expressed my suspicions of the German
character even at the age of six-and-twenty (see
Thoughts out of Season, vol. ii. pp. 164, 165), — to my
mind the Germans are impossible. When I try and
think of the kind of man who is opposed to me in all
my instincts, my mental image takes the form of a
German. The first thing I ask myself when I begin
analysing a man, is, whether he has a feeling for dis-
tance in him; whether he sees rank, gradation, and
order everywhere between man and man ; whether he
makes distinctions ; for this is what constitutes a gen-
tleman. Otherwise he belongs hopelessly to that
open-hearted,- open-minded — alas ! and always very
good-natured species, la canaille! But the Germans
are canaille — alas ! they are so good-natured ! A man
lowers himself by frequenting the society of Germans :
the German places every one on an equal footing.



WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS 47

With the exception of my intercourse with one or two
artists, and above all with Richard Wagner, I cannot
say that I have spent one pleasant hour with Germans.
Suppose, for one moment, that the profoundest spirit
of all ages were to appear among Germans, then one
of the saviours of the Capitol would be sure to arise
and declare that his own ugly soul was just as great.
I can no longer abide this race with which a man is
always in bad company, which has no idea of nuances —
woe to me ! I am a nuance — and which has not esprit
in its feet, and cannot even walk withal ! In short,
the Germans have no feet at all, they simply have legs.
The Germans have not the faintest idea of how vulgar
they are — but this in itself is the acme of vulgarity, —
they are not even ashamed of being merely Germans.
They will have their say in everything, they regard
themselves as fit to decide all questions ; I even fear
that they have decided about me. My whole life is
essentially a proof of this remark. In vain have I sought
among them for a sign of tact and delicacy towards
myself. Among Jews I did indeed find it, but not
among Germans. I am so constituted as to be gentle
and kindly to every one, — I have the right not to
draw distinctions, — but this does not prevent my eyes
from being open. I except no one, and least of all my
friends, — I only trust that this has not prejudiced my
reputation for humanity among them ? There are five
or six things which I have always made points of
honour. Albeit, the truth remains that for many years
I have considered almost every letter that has reached
me as a piece of cynicism. There is more cynicism in
an attitude of goodwill towards me than in any sort of
hatred. I tell every friend to his face that he has



4o ECCE HOMO

never thought it worth his while to study any one of
my writings : from the slightest hints I gather that
they do not even know what lies hidden in my books.
And with regard even to my Zarathustra, which of my
friends would have seen more in it than a piece of
unwarrantable, though fortunately harmless, arrogance ?
Ten years have elapsed, and no one has yet felt it a
duty to his conscience to defend my name against the
absurd silence beneath which it has been entombed.
It was a foreigner, a Dane, who first showed sufficient
keenness of instinct and of courage to do this, and
who protested indignantly against my so-called friends.
At what German University to-day would such lectures
on my philosophy be possible, as those which Dr.
Brandes delivered last spring in Copenhagen, thus
proving once more his right to the title psychologist ?
For my part, these things have never caused me any
pain ; that which is necessary does not offend me.
Amor fat i is the core of my nature. This, however,
does not alter the fact that I love irony and even
world-historic irony. And thus, about two years before
hurling the destructive thunderbolt of the Transval-
uation, which will send the whole of civilisation into
convulsions, I sent my Case of Wagner out into the
world. The Germans were given the chance of blun-
dering and immortalising their stupidity once more on
my account, and they still have just enough time to do
it in. And have they fallen in with my plans ?
Admirably ! my dear Germans. Allow me to con-
gratulate you.



WHY I AM A FATALITY

I KNOW my destiny. There will come a day when my
name will recall the memory of something formidable
— a crisis the like of which has never been known on
earth, the memory of the most profound clash of con-
sciences, and the passing of a sentence upon all that
which theretofore had been believed, exacted, and
hallowed. I am not a man, I am dynamite. And
with it all there is nought of the founder of a religion
in me. Religions are matters for the mob ; after com-
ing in contact with a religious man, I always feel that
I must wash my hands. ... I require no "believers,"
it is my opinion that I am too full of malice to believe
even in myself ; I never address myself to masses. I
am horribly frightened that one day I shall be pro-
nounced , "holy." You will understand why I publish
this book beforehand — it is to prevent people from
wronging me. I refuse to be a saint ; I would rather
be a clown. Maybe I am a clown. And I am not-
withstanding, or rather not «<?/withstanding, the mouth-
piece of truth ; for nothing more blown-out with false-
hood has ever existed, than a saint. But my truth is
terrible : for hitherto lies have been called truth. The
Transval nation of all Values, this is my formula for
mankind's greatest step towards coming to its senses —
a step which in me became flesh and genius. My
destiny ordained that I should be the first decent
human being, and that I should feel myself opposed to
the falsehood of millenniums. I was the first to dis-
cover truth, and for the simple reason that I was the
first who became conscious of falsehood as falsehood



50 ECCE HOMO

— that is to say, I smelt it as such. My genius resides
in my nostrils. I contradict as no one has contradicted
hitherto, and am nevertheless the reverse of a negative
spirit. I am the harbinger of joy, the like of which
has never existed before ; I have discovered tasks of
such lofty greatness that, until my time, no one had
any idea of such things. Mankind can begin to have
fresh hopes, only now that I have lived. Albeit, I am
necessarily a man of Fate. For when Truth enters the
lists against the falsehood of ages, shocks are bound
to ensue, and a spell of earthquakes, followed by the
transposition of hills and valleys, such as the world
has never yet imagined even in its dreams. The con-
cept "politics" then becomes elevated entirely to the
sphere of spiritual warfare. All the mighty realms of
the ancient order of society are blown into space — for
they are all based on falsehood : there will be wars,
the like of which have never been seen on earth before.
Only from my time and after me will politics on a large
scale — exist on earth.



If you should require a formula for a destiny of this
kind that has taken human form, you will find it in
my Zarathustra.

"And he who would be a creator in good and evil —
verily, he must first be a destroyer, and break values
into pieces.

"Thus the greatest evil belongeth unto the greatest
good : but this is the creative good."

I am by far the most terrible man that has ever
existed ; but this does not alter the fact that I shall



WHY I AM A FATALITY 51

become the most beneficent. I know the joy of anni-
hilation to a degree which is commensurate with my
power to annihilate. In both cases I obey my Diony-
sian nature, which knows not how to separate the neg-
ative deed from the saying of yea. I am the first
immoralist, and in this sense I am essentially the
annihilator.



People have never asked me as they should have
done, what the name of Zarathustra precisely meant in
my mouth, in the mouth of the first immoralist ; for
that which distinguishes this Persian from all others in
the past is the very fact that he was the exact reverse
of an immoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in
the struggle between good and evil the essential wheel
in the working of things. The translation of morality
into the realm of metaphysics, as force, cause, end-in-
itself, is his work. But the very question suggests its
own answer. Zarathustra created this most portentous
of all errors, — morality ; therefore he must be the first
to expose it. Not only because he has had longer and
greater experience of the subject than any other
thinker, — all history is indeed the experimental refuta-
tion of the theory of the so-called moral order of
things, — but because of the more important fact that
Zarathustra was the most truthful of thinkers. In his
teaching alone is truthfulness upheld as the highest
virtue — that is to say, as the reverse of the cowardice
of the "idealist" who takes to his heels at the sight of
reality. Zarathustra has more pluck in his body than
all other thinkers put together. To tell the truth and



52 ECCE HOMO"

to aim straight : that is the first Persian virtue. Have
I made myself clear ? . . . The overcoming of morality
by itself through truthfulness, the moralist's overcom-
ing of himself in his opposite — in me — that is what
the name Zarathustra means in my mouth.



In reaUty two negations are involved in my title
Immoralist. I first of all deny the type of man that
has hitherto been regarded as the highest — the good^
the kind, and the charitable ; and I also deny that kind
of morality which has become recognised and para-
mount as morality-in-itself — I speak of the morality of
decadence, or, to use a still cruder term. Christian
morality. I would agree to the second of the two
negations being regarded as the more decisive, for,
reckoned as a whole, the overestimation of goodness
and kindness seems to me already a consequence of
decadence, a symptom of weakness, and incompatible
with any ascending and yea-saying life. Negation and
annihilation are inseparable from a yea-saying attitude
towards life. Let me halt for a moment at the ques-
tion of the psychology of the good man. In order to
appraise the value of a certain type of man, the cost of
his maintenance must be calculated, — and the condi-
tions of his existence must be known. The condition
of the existence' of the good is falsehood : or, otherwise
expressed, the refusal at any price to see how reality is
actually constituted. The refusal to see that this real-
ity is not so constituted as always to be stimulating
beneficent instincts, and still less, so as to suffer at all
moments the intrusion of ignorant and good-natured



WHY 1 AM A FATALITY 53

hands. To consider distress of all kinds as an objec-
tion, as something which must be done away with, is
the greatest nonsense on earth ; generally speaking, it
is nonsense of the most disastrous sort, fatal in its
stupidity — almost as mad as the will to abolish bad
weather, out of pity for the poor, so to speak. In the
great economy of the whole universe, the terrors of
reality (in the passions, in the desires, in the will to
power) are incalculably more necessary than that form
of petty happiness which is called "goodness" ; it is
even needful to practise leniency in order so much as
to allow the latter a place at all, seeing that it is based
upon a falsification of the instincts. I shall have an
excellent opportunity of showing the incalculably
calamitous consequences to the whole of history, of
the credo of optimism, this monstrous offspring of the
homifies optimi. Zarathustra,* the first who recognised
that the optimist is just as degenerate as the pessimist,
though perhaps more detrimental, says: ^^Good men
7iever speak the truth. False shores and false harbours
were ye taught by the good. In the lies of the good were
ye borft and bred. Through the good everything hath
become false atid crooked from the roots. ''^ Fortunately
the world is not built merely upon those instincts
which would secure to the good-natured herd animal
his paltry happiness. To desire everybody to become
a "good man," "a gregarious animal," "a blue-eyed,
benevolent, beautiful soul," or — as Herbert Spencer
wished — a creature of altruism, would mean robbing
existence of its greatest character, castrating man, and
reducing humanity to a sort of wretched Chinadom.



54 ECCE HOMO

And this some have tried to do ! It is precisely this that
men called morality. In this sense Zarathustra calls
"the good," now "the last men," and anon "the begin-
ning of the end" ; and above all, he considers them as
the most detrimental kind of men, because they secure
their existence at the cost of Truth and at the cost of
the Future.

"The good — they cannot create ; they are ever the
beginning of the end.

"They crucify him who desireth new values on new
tables ; they sacrifice unto themselves the future ; they
crucify the whole future of humanity !

"The good — they are ever the beginning of the end.

"And whatever harm the slanderers of the world
may do, the harm of the good is the most calamitous of
all harm y



Zarathustra, as the first psychologist of the good
man, is perforce the friend of the evil man. When a
degenerate kind of man has succeed-ed to the highest
rank among the human species, his position must have
been gained at the cost of the reverse type — at the
cost of the strong man who is certain of life. When
the gregarious animal stands in the glorious rays of
the purest virtue, the exceptional man must be
degraded to the rank of the evil. If falsehood insists
at all costs on claiming the word "truth" for its own
particular standpoint, the really truthful man must be
sought out among the despised. Zarathustra allows of
no doubt here ; he says that it was precisely the
knowledge of the good, of the "best," which inspired



WHY I ARr A FATALITY 55

his absolute horror of men. And it was out of this
feeling of repulsion that he grew the wings which
allowed him to soar into remote futures. He does not
conceal the fact that his type of man is one which is
relatively superhuman — especially as opposed to the
"good" man, and that the good and the just would
regard his superman as the devil.

"Ye higher men, on whom my gaze now falls, this
is the doubt that ye wake in my breast, and this is my
secret laughter: methinks ye would call my Superman —
the devil! So strange are ye in your souls to all that
is great, that the Superman would be terrible in your
eyes for his goodness."

It is from this passage, and from no other, that you
must set out to understand the goal to which Zara-
thustra aspires — the kind of man that he conceives
sees reality as it is ; he is strong enough for this — he
is not estranged or far removed from it, he is that
reality himself, in his own nature can be found all the
terrible and questionable character of reality: only thus
can man have srreatness.



But I have chosen the title of Immoralist as a sur-
name and as a badge of honour in yet another sense ;
I am very proud to possess this name which distin-
guishes me from all the rest of mankind. No one
hitherto has felt Christian morality beneath him ; to
that end there were needed height, a remoteness of
vision, and an abysmal psychological depth, not
believed to be possible hitherto. Up to the present
Christian morality has been the Circe of- all thinkers —



56 ECCE HOMO

they stood at her service. What man, before my time,
had descended into the underground caverns from out
of which the poisonous fumes of this ideal — of this
slandering of the world — burst forth ? What man had
even dared to suppose that they were underground
caverns? Was a single one of the philosophers who
preceded me a psychologist at all, and not the very
reverse of a psychologist — that is to say, a "superior
swindler," an "Idealist ?" Before my time there was
no psychology. To be the first in this new realm may
amount to a curse ; at all events, it is a fatality : for
one is also the first to despise. My danger is the loath-
ing of mankind.



Have you understood me ? That which defines me,
that which makes me stand apart from the whole of
the rest of humanity, is the fact that I u?imasked
Christian morality. For this reason I was in need of
a word which conveyed the idea of a challenge to
everybody. Not to have awakened to these discoveries
before, struck me as being the sign of the greatest
uncleanliness that mankind has oa, its conscience, as
self-deception become instinctive, as the fundamental
will to be bliiid to every phenomenon, all causality and
all reality ; in fact, as an almost criminal fraud in
psychologicis. Blindness in regard to Christianity is
the essence of criminality — for it is the crime against
life. Ages and peoples, the first as well as the last,
philosophers and old women, with the exception of
five or six moments in history (and of myself, the
seventh), are all alike in this. Hitherto the Christian



WHY I AM A FATALITY 57

has been the "moral being," a peerless oddity, and, as
"a moral being," he was more absurd, more vain, more
thoughtless, and a greater disadvantage to himself,
than the greatest despiser of humanity could have
deemed possible. Christian morality is the* most
malignant form of all falsehood, the actual Circe of
humanity : that which has corrupted mankind. It is
not error as error which infuriates me at the sight of
this spectacle; it is not the millenniums of absence of
"goodwill," of discipline, of decency, and of bravery in
spiritual things, which betrays itself in the triumph of
Christianity; it is rather the absence of nature, it is
the perfectly ghastly fact that anti-nature itself received
the highest honours as morality and as law, and
remained suspended over man as the Categorical Im-
perative. Fancy blundering in this way, not as an
individual, not as a people, but as a whole species! as
humanity! To teach the contempt of all the principal
instincts of life; to posit falsely the existence of a
"soul," of a "spirit," in order to be able to defy the
body ; to spread the feeling that there is something
impure in the very first prerequisite of life — in sex ; to
seek the principle of evil in the profound need of
growth and expansiian — that is to say, in severe self-
love (the term itself is slanderous); and conversely to
see a higher moral value — but what am I talking
about i* — I mean the moral value per se^ in the typical
signs of decline, in the antagonism of the instincts, in
"selflessness," in the loss of ballast, in "the suppres-
sion of the personal element," and in "love of one's
neighbour" (neighbour-itis !) What ! is humanity itself
in a state of degeneration ? Has it always been in
this state? One thing is certain, that ye are taught



58 ECCE HOMO

only the values of decadence as the highest values.
The morality of self-renunciation is essentially the
morality of degeneration ; the fact, "I am going to the
dogs," is translated into the imperative, "Ye shall all
go to the dogs" — and not only into the imperative.
This morality of self-renunciation, which is the only
kind of morality that has been taught hitherto, betrays
the will to nonentity — -it denies life to the very roots.
There still remains the possibility that it is not man-
kind that is in a state of degeneration, but only that
parasitical kind of man — the priest, who, by means of
morality and lies, has climbed up to his position of
determinator of values, who divined in Christian moral-
ity his road to power. And, to tell the truth, this is
my opinion. The teachers and leaders of mankind,
including the theologians — have been, every one of
them, decadents: hence their transvaluation of all
values into a hostility towards life ; hence morality.
The definition of morality : Morality is the idiosyncrasy
of decadents, actuated by a desire to avenge themselves
with success upon life. I attach great value to this
definition.



8



Have you understood me ? I have not uttered a
single word which I had not already said five years
ago through my mouthpiece Zarathustra. The unmask-
ing of Christian morality is an event which is
unequalled in history, it is a real catastrophe. The
man who throws light upon it is a force majeure, a
fatality; he breaks the history of man into two. Time
is reckoned up before him and after him. The light-



WHY 1 AM A FATALITY 59

ning flash of truth struck precisely that which thereto-
fore had stood highest: he who understands what was
destroyed by that flash should look to see whether he
still holds anything in his hands. Everything which
until then was called truth, has been revealed as the
most detrimental, most spiteful, and most subterranean
form of life; the holy pretext, which was the "improve-
ment" of man, has been recognised as a ruse for
draining life of its energy and of its blood. Morality
conceived as Vampirism. . . . The man who unmasks
morality has also unmasked the worthlessness of the
values in which men either believe or have believed ;
he no longer sees anything to be revered in the most
venerable man — even in the types of men that have
been pronounced holy; all he can see in them is the
most fatal kind of abortions, fatal, because they fascinate.
The concept "God" was invented as the opposite of
the concept life — everything detrimental, poisonous,
and slanderous, and all deadly hostility to life, was
bound together in one horrible unit^ in him. The
concepts "beyond" and "true world" were invented in
order to depreciate the only world that exists — in order
that no goal or aim, no sense or task, might be left to
earthly reality. The concepts "soul," "spirit," and
last of all the concept "immortal soul," were invented
in order to throw contempt on the body, in order to
make it sick and "holy," in order to cultivate an atti-
tude of appalling levity towards all things in life which
deserve to be treated seriously, i. e. the questions of
nutrition and habitation, of intellectual diet, the treat-
ment of the sick, cleanliness, and weather. Instead
of health, we find the "salvation of the soul" — that is
to say, 2ifolie circulaire fluctuating between convulsions



6o ECCE HOMO

and penitence and the hysteria of redemption. The
concept "sin," together with the torture instrument
appertaining to it, which is the concept "free will,"
was invented in order to confuse and muddle our
instincts, and to render the mistrust of them man's
second nature! In the concepts "disinterestedness"
and "self-denial," the actual signs of decadence are to
be found. The allurement of that which is detrimental,
the inability to discover one's own advantage and self-
destruction, are made into absolute qualities, into the
"duty," the "holiness," and the "divinity" of man.
Finally — to keep the worst to the last — by the notion
of the good man, all that is favoured which is weak, ill,
botched, and sick-in-itself , which ought to be wiped out.
The law of selection is thwarted, an ideal is made out
of opposition to the proud, well-constituted man, to
him who says yea to life, to him who is certain of the
future, and who guarantees the future — this man is
henceforth called the evil one. And all this was
believed in as morality f—Ecrasez Vinfame I

9
Have you understood me ? Dionysus versus Christ.
