

PREFACE.



I.

I HAVE been told frequently, and always with
great surprise, that there is something common
and distinctive in all my writings, from the Birth
of Tragedy to the latest published Prelude to a
Philosophy of the Future. They all contain, I have
been told, snares and nets for unwary birds, and
an almost perpetual unconscious demand for the
inversion of customary valuations and valued
customs. What? Everything only — human —
all-too-human ? People lay down my writings
with this sigh, not without a certain dread and
distrust of morality itself, indeed almost tempted
and encouraged to become advocates of the worsi
things : as being perhaps only the best dis-
paraged ? My writings have been called a school
of suspicion and especially of disdain, more happily,
also, a school of courage and even of audacity.
Indeed, I myself do not think that any one has
ever looked at the world with such a profound
suspicion ; and not only as occasional Devil's
Advocate, but equally also, to speak theologically,
as enemy and impeacher of God ; and he who
realises something of the consequences involved,

VOL. I. A



2 PREFACE.

in every profound suspicion, something of the
chills and anxieties of loneliness to which every
uncompromising difference of outlook condemns
him who is affected therewith, will also understand
how often I sought shelter in some kind of
reverence or hostility, or scientificality or levity
or stupidity, in order to recover from myself, and,
as it were, to obtain temporary self-forgetfulness ;
also why, when I did not find what I needed^ I
was obliged to manufacture it, to counterfeit and
to imagine it in a suitable manner (and what else
have poets ever done? And for what purpose
has all the art in the world existed ?). What I
always required most, however, for my cure and
self-recovery, was the belief that I was not isolated
in such circumstances, that I did not see in an
isolated manner — a magic suspicion of relationship
and similarity to others in outlook and desire, a
repose in the confidence of friendship, a blindness
in both parties without suspicion or note of inter-
rogation, an enjoyment of foregrounds, and surfaces
of the near and the nearest, of all that has colour,
epidermis, and outside appearance. Perhaps I
might be reproached in this respect for much " art "
and fine false coinage ; for instance, for voluntarily
and knowingly shutting my eyes to Schopenhauer's
blind will to morality at a time when I had become
sufficiently clear-sighted about morality ; also for
deceiving myself about Richard Wagner's incurable
romanticism, as if it were a beginning and not an
end ; also about the Greeks, also about the Germans
and their future — and there would still probably
be quite a long list of such alsos? Supposing



PREFACE. 3

however, that this were all true and that I were
reproached with good reason, what do you know,
what could you know as to how much artifice of
self-preservation, how much rationality and higher
protection there is in such self-deception, — and
how much falseness I still require in order to allow
myself again and again the luxury of my sincerity ?
... In short, I still live ; and life, in spite of
ourselves, is not devised by morality ; it demands

illusion, it lives by illusion . . . but There !

I am already beginning again and doing what I
have always done, old immoralist and bird-catcher
that I am, — I am talking un-morally, ultra-moral ly,
" beyond good and evil " ? . . .



2.

Thus then, when I found it necessary, I invented
once on a time the " free spirits," to whom this
discouragingly encouraging book with the title
Human, all-too-Human, is dedicated. There are
no such " free spirits " nor have there been such,
but, as already said, I then required them for
company to keep me cheerful in the midst of evils
(sickness, loneliness, foreign ness, — acedia, inac-
tivity) as brave companions and ghosts with whom
I could laugh and gossip when so inclined and send
to the devil when they became bores, — as com-
pensation for the lack of friends. That such free
spirits will be possible some day, that our Europe
will have such bold and cheerful wights amongst
her sons of to-morrow and the day after to-morrow,
actually and bodily, and not merely, as in my case,



4 PREFACE.

as the shadows of a hermit's phantasmagoria —
/ should be the last to doubt thereof. Already
I see them coming, slowly, slowly ; and perhaps I
am doing something to hasten their coming when
I describe in advance under what auspices I see
them originate, and upon what paths I see them
come.

3.

One may suppose that a spirit in which the
type " free spirit " is to become fully mature and
sweet, has had its decisive event in a great emanci-
pation, and that it was all the more fettered pre-
viously and apparently bound for ever to its corner
and pillar. What is it that binds most strongly ?
What cords are almost unrendable? In men of
a lofty and select type it will be their duties ; the
reverence which is suitable to youth, respect and
tenderness for all that is time-honoured and worthy,
gratitude to the land which bore them, to the hand
which led them, to the sanctuary where they learnt
to adore, — their most exalted moments themselves
will bind them most effectively, will lay upon them
the most enduring obligations. For those who are
thus bound the great emancipation comes suddenly,
like an earthquake ; the young soul is all at once
convulsed, unloosened and extricated — it does not
itself know what is happening. An impulsion
and compulsion sway and over-master it like a
command ; a will and a wish awaken, to go forth
on their course, anywhere, at any cost ; a violent,
dangerous curiosity about an undiscovered world
flames and flares in every sense. " Better to



I



PREFACE. 5

die than live here " — says the imperious voice and
seduction, and this " here," this " at home " is all
that the soul has hitherto loved ! A sudden fear
and suspicion of that which it loved, a flash of
disdain for what was called its " duty," a rebellious,
arbitrary, volcanically throbbing longing for travel,
foreignness, estrangement, coldness, disenchant-
ment, glaciation, a hatred of love, perhaps a sacri-
legious clutch and look backwards, to where it
hitherto adored and loved, perhaps a glow of
shame at what it was just doing, and at the same
time a rejoicing that it was doing it, an intoxicated,
internal, exulting thrill which betrays a triumph
— a triumph ? Over what ? Over whom ? An
enigmatical, questionable, doubtful triumph, but
the first triumph nevertheless ; — such evil and
painful incidents belong to the history of the great
emancipation. It is, at the same time, a disease
which may destroy the man, this first outbreak of
power and will to self-decision, self-valuation, this
will \.o free will; and how much disease is mani-
fested in the wild attempts and eccentricities by
which the liberated and emancipated one now
seeks to demonstrate his mastery over things ! He
roves about raging with unsatisfied longing ; what-
ever he captures has to suffer for the dangerous
tension of his pride ; he tears to pieces whatever
attracts him. With a malicious laugh he twirls
round whatever he finds veiled or guarded by a
sense of shame ; he tries how these things look
when turned upside down. It is a matter of
arbitrariness with him, and pleasure in arbitrariness,
if he now perhaps bestow his favour on what



6 PREFACE.

had hitherto a bad repute, — if he inquisitively
and temptingly haunt what is specially forbidden.
In the background of his activities and wanderings
— for he is restless and aimless in his course as in
a desert — stands the note of interrogation of an
increasingly dangerous curiosity. " Cannot all
valuations be reversed ? And is good perhaps
evil ? And God only an invention and artifice
of the devil? Is everything, perhaps, radically
false ? And if we are the deceived, are we not
thereby also deceivers ? Must we not also be
deceivers ? " — Such thoughts lead and mislead
him more and more, onward and away. Solitude
encircles and engirdles him, always more threaten-
ing, more throttling, more heart-oppressing, that
terrible goddess and mater scsva cupidinum — but
who knows nowadays what solitude is ? . , ,



4.

From this morbid solitariness, from the desert
of such years of experiment, it is still a long way
to the copious, overflowing safety and soundness
which does not care to dispense with disease
itself as an instrument and angling-hook of
knowledge ; — to that mature freedom of spirit
which is equally self-control and discipline of
the heart, and gives access to many and opposed
modes of thought ; — to that inward comprehen-
siveness and daintiness of superabundance, which
excludes any danger of the spirit's becoming
enamoured and lost in its own paths, and



PREFACE. jr

lying intoxicated in some corner or other ; to that
excess of plastic, healing, formative, and restorative
powers, which is exactly the sign of splendid
health, that excess which gives the free spirit
the dangerous prerogative of being entitled to
live by experiments and offer itself to adventure ;
the free spirit's prerogative of mastership ! Long
years of convalescence may lie in between, years
full of many-coloured, painfully-enchanting magi-
cal transformations, curbed and led by a tough
will to health, which often dares to dress and
disguise itself as actual health. There is a middle
condition therein, which a man of such a fate
never calls to mind later on without emotion ; a
pale, delicate light and a sunshine-happiness are
peculiar to him, a feeling of bird-like freedom,
prospect, and haughtiness, a tertium quid in
which curiosity and gentle disdain are combined.
A " free spirit " — this cool expression does good
in every condition, it almost warms. One no
longer lives, in the fetters of love and hatred,
without Yea, without Nay, voluntarily near,
voluntarily distant, preferring to escape, to turn
aside, to flutter forth, to fly up and away; one
is fastidious like every one who has once seen
an immense variety beneath him, — and one has
become the opposite of those who trouble them-
selves about things which do not concern them.
In fact, it is nothing but things which now
concern the free spirit, — and how many things ! —
which no longer trouble him !



t0REFACE.



A step further towards recovery, and the free
spirit again draws near to life ; slowly, it is
true, and almost stubbornly, almost distrustfully.
Again it grows warmer around him, and, as it
were, yellower ; feeling and sympathy gain depth,
thawing winds of every kind pass lightly over him.
He almost feels as if his eyes were now first opened
to what is near. He marvels and is still ; where
has he been ? The near and nearest things, how
changed they appear to him ! What a bloom and
magic they have acquired meanwhile ! He looks
back gratefully, — grateful to his wandering, his
austerity and self-estrangement, his far-sightedness
and his bird-like flights in cold heights. What a
good thing that he did not always stay " at home,"
" by himself," like a sensitive, stupid tenderling.
He has been beside himself ^ there is no doubt. He
now sees himself for the first time, — and what sur-
prises he feels thereby ! What thrills unexperienced
hitherto ! What joy even in the weariness, in the
old illness, in the relapses of the convalescent !
How he likes to sit still and suffer, to practise
patience, to lie in the sun ! Who is as familiar as
he with the joy of winter, with the patch of sun-
shine upon the wall ! They are the most grateful
animals in the world, and also the most un-
assuming, these lizards of convalescents with
their faces half-turned towards life once more : —
there are those amongst them who never let a
day pass without hanging a little hymn of praise
on its trailing fringe. And, speaking seriously, it



PREFACE. 9

is a radical cure for all pessimism (the well-known
disease of old idealists and falsehood-mongers) to
become ill after the manner of these free spirits,
to remain ill a good while, and then grow well (I
mean " better ") for a still longer period. It is
wisdom, practical wisdom, to prescribe even health
for one's self for a long time only in small doses.

6.

About this time it may at last happen, under
the sudden illuminations of still disturbed and
changing health, that the enigma of that great
emancipation begins to reveal itself to the free,
and ever freer, spirit, — that enigma which had
hitherto lain obscure, questionable, and almost
intangible, in his memory. If for a long time he
scarcely dared to ask himself, " Why so apart ?
So alone ? denying everything that I revered ?
denying reverence itself? Why this hatred, this
suspicion, this severity towards my own virtues ? "
— he now dares and asks the questions aloud, and
already hears something like an answer to them —
" Thou shouldst become master over thyself and
master also of thine own virtues. Formerly they
were thy masters ; but they are only entitled to
be thy tools amongst other tools. Thou shouldst
obtain power over thy pro and contra, and learn
how to put them forth and withdraw them again
in accordance with thy higher purpose. Thou
shouldst learn how to take the proper perspective
of every valuation — the shifting, distortion, and
apparent teleology of the horizons and everything



10 PREFACE.

that belongs to perspective ; also the amount of
stupidity which opposite values involve, and all
the intellectual loss with which every pro and every
contra has to be paid for. Thou shouldst learn
how much necessary injustice there is in every for
and against, injustice as inseparable from life, and
life itself as conditioned by the perspective and its
injustice. Above all thou shouldst see clearly
where the injustice is always greatest : — namely,
where life has developed most punily, restrictedly,
necessitously, and incipiently, and yet cannot help
regarding itself as the purpose and standard of
things, and for the sake of self-preservation, secretly,
basely, and continuously wasting away and calling
in question the higher, greater, and richer, — thou
shouldst see clearly the problem of gradation of
rank, and how power and right and amplitude of

perspective grow up together. Thou shouldst '

But enough ; the free spirit knows henceforth
which " thou shalt " he has obeyed, and also what
he can now do, what he only now — may do. , , .



7-

Thus doth the free spirit answer himself with
regard to the riddle of emancipation, and ends
therewith, while he generalises his case, in order
thus to decide with regard to his experience. " As
it has happened to me" he says to himself, " so must
it happen to every one in whom a mission seeks
to embody itself and to ' come into the world.' "
The secret power and necessity of this mission will
operate in and upon the destined individuals like



PREFACE II

.ian unconscious pregnancy, — long before they have
had the mission itself in view and have known its
name. Our destiny rules over us, even when we
are not yet aware of it ; it is the future that makes
laws for our to-day. Granted that it is the problem
of the gradations of rank, of which we may say
that it is our problem, we free spirits ; now only
in the midday of our life do we first understand
what preparations, detours, tests, experiments,
and disguises the problem needed, before it was
pertnitted to rise before us, and how we had first
to experience the most manifold and opposing
conditions of distress and happiness in soul
and body, as adventurers and circumnavigators of
the inner world called " man," as surveyors of all
the " higher " and the " one-above-another," also
called " man " — penetrating everywhere, almost
without fear, rejecting nothing, losing nothing,
tasting everything, cleansing everything from all
that is accidental, and, as it were, sifting it out
— until at last we could say, we free spirits,
" Here — a new problem ! Here a long ladder,
the rungs of which we ourselves have sat upon
and mounted, — which we ourselves at some time
have been ! Here a higher place, a lower place,
an under-us, an immeasurably long order, a
hierarchy which we see \ here — our problem ! "



8.

No psychologist or augur will be in doubt for a
moment as to what stage of the development just
described the following book belongs (or is assigned



12 PREFACE.

to). But where are these psychologists nowa-
days ? In France, certainly ; perhaps in Russia ;
assuredly not in Germany. Reasons are not lack-
ing why the present-day Germans could still even
count this as an honour to them — bad enough,
surely, for one who in this respect is un-German
in disposition and constitution ! This German
book, which has been able to find readers in a
wide circle of countries and nations — it has been
about ten years going its rounds — and must
understand some sort of music and piping art,
by means of which even coy foreign ears are
seduced into listening, — it is precisely in Germany
that this book has been most negligently read, and
worst listened to ; what is the reason ? "It de-
mands too much," I have been told, " it appeals to
men free from the pressure of coarse duties, it wants
refined and fastidious senses, it needs superfluity —
superfluity of time, of clearness of sky and heart,
oi otium in the boldest sense of the term : — purely
good things, which we Germans of to-day do not
possess and therefore cannot give." After such a
polite answer my philosophy advises me to be
silent and not to question further ; besides, in cer-
tain cases, as the proverb points out, one only
remains a philosopher by being — silent."*

Nice, Spring 1886.



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



FIRST DIVISION.
FIRST AND LAST THINGS.

I.

Chemistry of Ideas and Sensations. — Philo-
sophical problems adopt in almost all matters the
same form of question as they did two thousand
years ago ; how can anything spring from its
opposite ? for instance, reason out of unreason, the
sentient out of the dead, logic out of unlogic, dis-
interested contemplation out of covetous willing,
life for others out of egoism, truth out of error ?
Metaphysical philosophy has helped itself over
those difficulties hitherto by denying the origin of
one thing in another, and assuming a miraculous
origin for more highly valued things, immediately
out of the kernel and essence of the " thing in
itself." Historical philosophy, on the contrary,
which is no longer to be thought of as separate
from physical science, the youngest of all philo-
sophical methods, has ascertained in single cases
(and presumably this will happen in everything)



14 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that there are no opposites except in the usual
exaggeration of the popular or metaphysical point
of view, and that an error of reason lies at the
bottom of the opposition : according to this ex-
planation, strictly understood, there is neither an
unegoistical action nor an entirely disinterested
point of view, they are both only sublimations in
which the fundamental element appears almost
evaporated, and is only to be discovered by the
closest observation. All that we require, and which
can only be given us by the present advance of
the single sciences, is a chemistry of the moral,
religious, eesthetic ideas and sentiments, as also of
those emotions which we experience in ourselves
both in the great and in the small phases of social
and intellectual intercourse, and even in solitude ;
but what if this chemistry should result in the fact
that also in this case the most beautiful colours
have been obtained from base, even despised
materials ? Would many be inclined to pursue
such examinations ? Humanity likes to put all
questions as to origin and beginning out of its
mind ; must one not be almost dehumanised to
feel a contrary tendency in one's self?



2.

Inherited Faults of Philosophers. — All
philosophers have the common fault that they
start from man in his present state and hope to
attain their end by an analysis of him. Uncon-
sciously they look upon " man " as an sterna Veritas,
as a thing unchangeable in all commotion, as a sure



I



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 15

standard of things. But everything that the philo-
sopher says about man is really nothing more than
testimony about the man of a very limited space
of time. A lack of the historical sense is the
hereditary fault of all philosophers ; many, indeed,
unconsciously mistake the very latest variety of man,
such as has arisen under the influence of certain
religions, certain political events, for the permanent
form from which one must set out. They will
not learn that man has developed, that his faculty
of knowledge has developed also ; whilst for some
of them the entire world is spun out of this faculty
of knowledge. Now everything ^j-j^^//^/ in human
development happened in pre-historic times, long
before those four thousand years which we know
something of; man may not have changed much
during this time. But the philosopher sees " in-
stincts " in the present man and takes it for granted
that this is one of the unalterable facts of man-
kind, and, consequently, can furnish a key to the
understanding of the world ; the entire teleology
is so constructed that man of the last four thousand
years is spoken of as an eternal being, towards
which all things in the world have from the be-
ginning a natural direction. But everything has
evolved ; there are no eternal facts, as there are
likewise no absolute truths. Therefore, historical
philosophising- is henceforth necessary, and with it
the virtue of diffidence.

3.

Appreciation of Unpretentious Truths.
— It is a mark of a higher culture to value the



l6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

little unpretentious truths, which have been found
by means of strict method, more highly than the
joy-diffusing and dazzling errors which spring from
metaphysical and artistic times and peoples. First
of all one has scorn on the lips for the former, as
if here nothing could have equal privileges with
anything else, so unassuming, simple, bashful,
apparently discouraging are they, so beautiful,
stately, intoxicating, perhaps even animating, are
the others. But the hardly attained, the certain,
the lasting, and therefore of great consequence for
all wider knowledge, is still the higher ; to keep
one's self to that is manly and shows bravery, sim-
plicity, and forbearance. Gradually not only single
individuals but the whole of mankind will be
raised to this manliness, when it has at last
accustomed itself to the higher appreciation of
durable, lasting knowledge, and has lost all belief
in inspiration and the miraculous communication
of truths. Respecters of forms, certainly, with
their standard of the beautiful and noble, will first
of all have good reasons for mockery, as soon as
the appreciation of unpretentious truths, and the
scientific spirit, begin to obtain the mastery; but
only because their eye has either not yet recog-
nised the charm of the simplest form, or because
men educated in that spirit are not yet completely
and inwardly saturated by it, so that they still
thoughtlessly imitate old forms (and badly enough,
as one does who no longer cares much about the
matter). Formerly the spirit was not occupied
with strict thought, its earnestness then lay in
the spinning out of symbols and forms. This is



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 1 7

changed ; that earnestness in the symbolical has
become the mark of a lower culture. As our arts
themselves grow evermore intellectual, our senses
more spiritual, and as, for instance, people now
judge concerning what sounds well to the senses
quite differently from how they did a hundred
years ago, so the forms of our life grow ever
more spiritual, to the eye of older ages perhaps
uglier, but only because it is incapable of perceiv-
ing how the kingdom of the inward, spiritual
beauty constantly grows deeper and wider, and to
what extent the inner intellectual look may be of
more importance to us all than the most beautiful
bodily frame and the noblest architectural structure

4.
Astrology and the Like. — It is probable
that the objects of religious, moral, aesthetic and
logical sentiment likewise belong only to the sur-
face of things, while man willingly believes that
here, at least, he has touched the heart of the
world ; he deceives himself, because those things
enrapture him so profoundly, and make him so pro-
foundly unhappy, and he therefore shows the same
pride here as in astrology. For astrology believes
that the firmament moves round the destiny of
man ; the moral man, however, takes it for granted
that what he has essentially at heart must also be
the essence and heart of things.



I



5-
Misunderstanding of Dreams. — In the ages
of a rude and primitive civilisation man believed

VOL. I. B



l8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that in dreams he became acquainted with a second
actual world ; herein lies the origin of all meta-
physics. Without dreams there could have been
found no reason for a division of the world. The
distinction, too, between soul and body is connected
with the most ancient comprehension of dreams,
also the supposition of an imaginary soul-body,
therefore the origin of all belief in spirits, and
probably also the belief in gods. " The dead
continues to live, for he appears to the living
in a dream " : thus men reasoned of old for
thousands and thousands of years.



6.

The Scientific Spirit partially but not
WHOLLY Powerful. — The smallest subdivisions
of science taken separately are dealt with purely
in relation to themselves, — the general, great
sciences, on the contrary, regarded as a whole, call
up the question — certainly a very non-objective
one — " Wherefore ? To what end ? " It is this
utilitarian consideration which causes them to be
dealt with less impersonally when taken as a
whole than when considered in their various parts.
In philosophy, above all, as the apex of the entire
pyramid of science, the question as to the utility of *
knowledge is involuntarily brought forward, and
every philosophy has the unconscious intention of
ascribing to it the greatest usefulness. For this
reason there is so much high-flying metaphysics
in all philosophies and such a shyness of the
apparently unimportant solutions of physics ; for



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 19

the importance of knowledge for life must appear
as great as possible. Here is the antagonism
between the separate provinces of science and
philosophy. The latter desires, what art does, to
give the greatest possible depth and meaning to
life and actions ; in the former one seeks know-
ledge and nothing further, whatever may emerge
thereby. So far there has been no philosopher in
whose hands philosophy has not grown into an
apology for knowledge ; on this point, at least,
every one is an optimist, that the greatest usefulness
must be ascribed to knowledge. They are all
tyrannised over by logic, and this is optimism — in
its essence.

7.

The Kill-joy in Science. — Philosophy
separated from science when it asked the question,
" Which is the knowledge of the world and of life
which enables man to live most happily ? " This
happened in the Socratic schools ; the veins of
scientific investigation were bound up by the
point of view of happiness, — and are so still.

8.

Pneumatic Explanation of Nature. —
Metaphysics explains the writing of Nature, so to
^"^^ik, pneumatically , as the Church and her learned
men formerly did with the Bible. A great deal
of understanding is required to apply to Nature
the same method of strict interpretation as the
philologists have now established for all books



20 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

with the intention of clearly understanding what
the text means, but not suspecting a double sense
or even taking it for granted. Just, however, as
with regard to books, the bad art of interpretation
is by no means overcome, and in the most
cultivated society one still constantly comes across
the remains of allegorical and mystic interpretation,
so it is also with regard to Nature, indeed it is
even much worse.

9.

The Metaphysical World. — It is true that
there 'might be a metaphysical world ; the absolute
possibility of it is hardly to be disputed. We
look at everything through the human head and
cannot cut this head off; while the question
remains, What would be left of the world if it had
been cut off ? This is a purely scientific problem,
and one not very likely to trouble mankind ;
but everything which has hitherto made meta-
physical suppositions valuable^ terrible, delightful
for man, what has produced them, is passion, error,
and self-deception ; the very worst methods of
knowledge, not the best, have taught belief therein.
When these methods have been discovered as the
foundation of all existing religions and meta-
physics, they have been refuted. Then there still
always remains that possibility ; but there is
nothing to be done with it, much less is it possible
to let happiness, salvation, and life depend on the
spider-thread of such a possibility. For nothing
could be said of the metaphysical world but that
it would be a different condition, a condition in-



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 21

accessible and incomprehensible to us; it would
be a thing of negative qualities. Were the
existence of such a world ever so well proved, the
fact would nevertheless remain that it would be
precisely the most irrelevant of all forms of
knowledge : more irrelevant than the knowledge
of the chemical analysis of water to the sailor in
danger in a storm.

lO.

The Harmlessness of Metaphysics in the
Future. — Directly the origins of religion, art,
and morals have been so described that one can
perfectly explain them without having recourse to
metaphysical concepts at the beginning and in the
course of the path, the strongest interest in the
purely theoretical problem of the " thing-in-itself "
and the " phenomenon " ceases. For however it
may be here, with religion, art, and morals we do
not touch the " essence of the world in itself" ; we
are in the domain of representation, no " intuition "
can carry us further. With the greatest calmness
we shall leave the question as to how our own
conception of the world can differ so widely from
the revealed essence of the world, to physiology
and the history of the evolution of organisms and
ideas.

II.

t Language as a Presumptive Science. —
The importance of language for the development
of culture lies in the fact that in language man has



22 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

placed a world of his own beside the other, a
position which he deemed so fixed that he might
therefrom lift the rest of the world off its hinges,
and make himself master of it. Inasmuch as
man has believed in the ideas and names of things
as c&tern<2 veritates for a great length of time, he
has acquired that pride by which he has raised
himself above the animal ; he really thought that
in language he possessed the knowledge of the
world. The maker of language was not modest
enough to think that he only gave designations to
things, he believed rather that with his words he
expressed the widest knowledge of the things ; in
reality language is the first step in the endeavour
after science. Here also it is belief in ascertained
truth, from which the mightiest sources of strength
have flowed. Much later — only now — it is dawn-
ing upon men that they have propagated a
tremendous error in their belief in language.
Fortunately it is now too late to reverse the
development of reason, which is founded upon that
belief. Logic, also, is founded upon suppositions
to which nothing in the actual world corresponds, —
for instance, on the supposition of the equality of
things, and the identity of the same thing at
different points of time, — but that particular
science arose out of the contrary belief (that such
things really existed in the actual world). It is
the same with mathematics, which would certainly
not have arisen if it had been known from the
beginning that in Nature there are no exactly
straight lines, no real circle, no absolute standard
of size.



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 23



12.

Dream and Culture. — The function of the
brain which is most influenced by sleep is the
memory ; not that it entirely ceases ; but it is
brought back to a condition of imperfection, such as
everyone may have experienced in pre-historic times,
whether asleep or awake. Arbitrary and confused
as it is, it constantly confounds things on the
ground of the most fleeting resemblances ; but
with the same arbitrariness and confusion the
ancients invented their mythologies, and even at
the present day travellers are accustomed to
remark how prone the savage is to forgetfulness,
how, after a short tension of memory, his mind
begins to sway here and there from sheer weariness
and gives forth lies and nonsense. But in dreams
we all resemble the savage ; bad recognition and
erroneous comparisons are the reasons of the bad
conclusions, of which we are guilty in dreams : so
that, when we clearly recollect what we have
dreamt, we are alarmed at ourselves at harbour-
ing so much foolishness within us. The perfect
distinctness of all dream-representations, which
pre-suppose absolute faith in their reality, recall
the conditions that appertain to primitive man,
in whom hallucination was extraordinarily frequent,
and sometimes simultaneously seized entire com-
munities, entire nations. Therefore, in sleep and
in dreams we once more carry out the task of
early humanity.



24 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

13.

The Logic of Dreams. — In sleep our nervous
system is perpetually excited by numerous inner
occurrences ; nearly all the organs are disjointed
and in a state of activity, the blood runs its
turbulent course, the position of the sleeper causes
pressure on certain limbs, his coverings influence
his sensations in various ways, the stomach digests
and by its movements it disturbs other organs,
the intestines writhe, the position of the head
occasions unaccustomed play of muscles, the feet,
unshod, not pressing upon the floor with the soles,
occasion the feeling of the unaccustomed just as
does the different clothing of the whole body :
all this, according to its daily change and extent,
excites by its extraordinariness the entire system
to the very functions of the brain, and thus there
are a hundred occasions for the spirit to be sur-
prised and to seek for the reasons of this excita-
tion ; — the dream, however, is the seeking and
representing of the causes of those excited sensa-
tions, — that is, of the supposed causes. A person
who, for instance, binds his feet with two straps
will perhaps dream that two serpents are coiling
round his feet ; this is first hypothesis, then a
belief, with an accompanying mental picture and
interpretation — " These serpents must be the causa
of those sensations which I, the sleeper, experi-
ence," — so decides the mind of the sleeper. The
immediate past, so disclosed, becomes to him the
present through his excited imagination. Thus
every one knows from experience how quickly the



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 2$

dreamer weaves into his dream a loud sound that
he hears, such as the ringing of bells or the firing
of cannon, that is to say, explains it from a/Ur-
wards so that he first thinks he experiences the
producing circumstances and then that sound.
But how does it happen that the mind of the
dreamer is always so mistaken, while the same
mind when awake is accustomed to be so tem-
perate, careful, and sceptical with regard to its
hypotheses ? so that the first random hypo-
thesis for the explanation of a feeling suffices for
him to believe immediately in its truth ? (For in
dreaming we believe in the dream as if it were a
reality, i.e. we think our hypothesis completely
proved.) I hold, that as man now still reasons
in dreams, so men reasoned also when awake
through thousands of years ; the first causa which
occurred to the mind to explain anything that
required an explanation, was sufficient and stood
for truth. (Thus, according to travellers' tales,
savages still do to this very day.) This ancient
element in human nature still manifests itself in
our dreams, for it is the foundation upon which
the higher reason has developed and still develops
in every individual ; the dream carries us back
into remote conditions of human culture, and pro-
vides a ready means of understanding them better.
Dream-thinking is now so easy to us because
during immense periods of human development
we have been so well drilled in this form of
fantastic and cheap explanation, by means of the
first agreeable notions. In so far, dreaming is a
recreation for the brain, which by day has to



26 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

satisfy the stern demands of thought, as they are
laid down by the higher culture. We can at
once discern an allied process even in our
awakened state, as the door and ante-room of the
dream. If we shut our eyes, the brain produces
a number of impressions of light and colour, prob-
ably as a kind of after-play and echo of all
those effects of light which crowd in upon it by
day. Now, however, the understanding, together
with the imagination, instantly works up this
play of colour, shapeless in itself, into definite
figures, forms, landscapes, and animated groups.
The actual accompanying process thereby is again
a kind of conclusion from the effect to the cause :
since the mind asks, " Whence come these impres-
sions of light and colour ? " it supposes those
figures and forms as causes ; it takes them for the
origin of those colours and lights, because in the
daytime, with open eyes, it is accustomed to find
a producing cause for every colour, every effect of
light. Here, therefore, the imagination constantly
places pictures before the mind, since it supports
itself on the visual impressions of the day in their
production, and the dream-imagination does just
the same thing, — that is, the supposed cause is
deduced from the effect and represented after the
effect ; all this happens with extraordinary rapidity,
so that here, as with the conjuror, a confusion of
judgment may arise and a sequence may look like
something simultaneous, or even like a reversed
sequence. From these circumstances we may
gather how lately the more acute logical thinking,
the strict discrimination of cause and effect has



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 27

been developed, when our reasoning and under-
standing faculties still involuntarily hark back to
those primitive forms of deduction, and when we
pass about half our life in this condition. The
poet, too, and the artist assign causes for their
moods and conditions which are by no means the
true ones ; in this they recall an older humanity
and can assist us to the understanding of it.



14.

Co-echoing. — All stronger moods bring with
them a co-echoing of kindred sensations and
moods, they grub up the memory, so to speak.
Along with them something within us remembers
and becomes conscious of similar conditions and
their origin. Thus there are formed quick habit-
ual connections of feelings and thoughts, which
eventually, when they follow each other with
lightning speed, are no longer felt as complexes
but as unities. In this sense one speaks of the
moral feeling, of the religious feeling, as if they
were absolute unities : in reality they are streams
with a hundred sources and tributaries. Here
also, as so often happens, the unity of the word
is no security for the unity of the thing.

15.

No Internal and External in the
World. — As Democritus transferred the con-
cepts " above " and " below " to endless space
where they have no sense, so philosophers in



28 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

general have transferred the concepts " Internal "
and " External " to the essence and appearance of
the world ; they think that with deep feelings one
can penetrate deeply into the internal and ap-
proach the heart of Nature. But these feelings
are only deep in so far as along with them, barely
noticeable, certain complicated groups of thoughts,
which we call deep, are regularly excited ; a feel-
ing is deep because we think that the accompany-
ing thought is deep. But the *' deep " thought
can nevertheless be very far from the truth, as, for
instance, every metaphysical one ; if one take away
from the deep feeling the commingled elements
of thought, then the strong feeling remains, and
this guarantees nothing for knowledge but itself,
just as strong faith proves only its strength and
not the truth of what is believed in.



i6. f

Phenomenon and Thing-in-itself. — Phil-
osophers are in the habit of setting themselves
before life and experience — before that which they
call the world of appearance — as before a picture
that is once for all unrolled and exhibits unchange-
ably fixed the same process, — this process, they
think, must be rightly interpreted in order to come
to a conclusion about the being that produced the
picture : about the thing-in-itself, therefore, which
is always accustomed to be regarded as sufficient
ground for the world of phenomenon. On the
other hand, since one always makes the idea of the
metaphysical stand definitely as that of the uncon-



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 29

ditioned, consequently also unconditioning, one
must directly disown all connection between the
unconditioned (the metaphysical world) and the
world which is known to us ; so that the thing-in-
itself should most certainly not appear in the
phenomenon, and every conclusion from the former
as regards the latter is to be rejected. Both
sides overlook the fact that that picture — that
which we now call human life and experience —
has gradually evolved, — nay, is still in the full pro-
cess of evolving, — and therefore should not be
regarded as a fixed magnitude from which a con-
clusion about its originator might be deduced (the
sufficing cause) or even merely neglected. It is
because for thousands of years we have looked
into the world with moral, aesthetic, and religious
pretensions, with blind inclination, passion, or fear,
and have surfeited ourselves in the vices of illogical
thought, that this world has gradually become so
marvellously motley, terrible, full of meaning and
of soul, it has acquired colour — but we were the
colourists ; the human intellect, on the basis of
human needs, of human emotions, has caused this
" phenomenon " to appear and has carried its
erroneous fundamental conceptions into things.
Late, very late, it takes to thinking, and now the
world of experience and the thing-in-itself seem
to it so extraordinarily different and separated,
that it gives up drawing conclusions from the
former to the latter — or in a terribly mysterious
manner demands the renunciation of our intellect,
of our personal will, in order thereby to reach the
essential, that one may become essential. Again,



30 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

others have collected all the characteristic features
of our world of phenomenon, — that is, the idea of
the world spun out of intellectual errors and in-
herited by us, — and instead of accusing the intellect
as the offenders, they have laid the blame on the
nature of things as being the cause of the hard fact
of this very sinister character of the world, and have
preached the deliverance from Being. With all
these conceptions the constant and laborious pro-
cess of science (which at last celebrates its great-
est triumph in a history of the origin of thought)
becomes completed in various ways, the result of
which might perhaps run as follows : — "That which
we now call the world is the result of a mass of
errors and fantasies which arose gradually in the
general development of organic being, which are
inter-grown with each other, and are now inherited
by us as the accumulated treasure of all the past,
— as a treasure, for the value of our humanity
depends upon it. From this world of representa-
tion strict science is really only able to liberate
us to a very slight extent — as it is also not at
all desirable — inasmuch as it cannot essentially
break the power of primitive habits of feeling ; but
it can gradually elucidate the history of the rise of
that world as representation, — and lift us, at least
for moments, above and beyond the whole process.
Perhaps we shall then recognise that the thing in
itself is worth a Homeric laugh ; that it seemed
so much, indeed everything, and is really empty,
namely, empty of meaning."



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 31

17.

Metaphysical Explanations. — The young
man values metaphysical explanations, because
they show him something highly significant in
things which he found unpleasant or despicable,
and if he is dissatisfied with himself, the feeling
becomes lighter when he recognises the innermost
world-puzzle or world-misery in that which he so
strongly disapproves of in himself. To feel him-
self less responsible and at the same time to find
things more interesting — that seems to him a
double benefit for which he has to thank meta-
physics. Later on, certainly, he gets distrustful
of the whole metaphysical method of explanation ;
then perhaps it grows clear to him that those
results can be obtained equally well and more
scientifically in another way : that physical and
historical explanations produce the feeling of
personal relief to at least the same extent,
and that the interest in life and its problems is
perhaps still more aroused thereby.

18.

Fundamental Questions of Metaphysics.
— When the history of the rise of thought comes
to be written, a new light will be thrown on the
following statement of a distinguished logician : —
"The primordial general law of the cognisant
subject consists in the inner necessity of recog-
nising every object in itself in its own nature, as a
thing identical with itself, consequently self-exist-



$2 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ing and at bottom remaining ever the same
and unchangeable : in short, in recognising every-
thing as a substance." Even this law, which is
here called " primordial," has evolved : it will some
day be shown how gradually this tendency arises
in the lower organisms, how the feeble mole-eyes
of their organisations at first see only the same
thing, — how then, when the various awakenings
of pleasure and displeasure become noticeable,
various substances are gradually distinguished, but
each with one attribute, i.e. one single relation to
such an organism. The first step in logic is the
judgment, — the nature of which, according to the
decision of the best logicians, consists in belief.
At the bottom of all belief lies ike sensation of the
pleasant or the painful in relation to the sentient
subject. A new third sensation as the result of
two previous single sensations is the judgment
in its simplest form. We organic beings have
originally no interest in anything but its relation to
us in connection with pleasure and pain. Between
the moments (the states of feeling) when we become
conscious of this connection, lie moments of rest,
of non-feeling ; the world and everything is then
without interest for us, we notice no change in it
(as even now a deeply interested person does not
notice when any one passes him). To the plant,
things are as a rule tranquil and eternal, every-
thing like itself. From the period of the lower
organisms man has inherited the belief that
similar things exist (this theory is only con-
tradicted by the matured experience of the most
advanced science). The primordial belief of



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 33

everything organic from the beginning is perhaps
even this, that all the rest of the world is one and
immovable. The point furthest removed from
those early beginnings of logic is the idea of
Causality, — indeed we still really think that all
sensations and activities are acts of the free will;
when the sentient individual contemplates himself,
he regards every sensation, every alteration as
something isolated, that is to say, unconditioned
and disconnected, — it rises up in us without con-
nection with anything foregoing or following.
We are hungry, but do not originally think that
the organism must be nourished ; the feeling seems
to make itself felt without cause and purpose, it
isolates itself and regards itself as arbitrary.
Therefore, belief in the freedom of the will is an
original error of everything organic, as old as the
existence of the awakenings of logic in it; the
belief in unconditioned substances and similar
things is equally a primordial as well as an old
error of everything organic. But inasmuch as
all metaphysics has concerned itself chiefly with
substance and the freedom of will, it may be
designated as the science which treats of the
fundamental errors of mankind, but treats of
them as if they were fundamental truths.

19.

Number. — The discovery of the laws of numbers
is made upon the ground of the original, already
prevailing error, that there are many similar things
(but in reality there is nothing similar), at least,



34 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that there are things (but there is no " thing ").
The supposition of plurality always presumes that
there is something which appears frequently, — but
here already error reigns, already we imagine
beings, unities, which do not exist. Our sensations
of space and time are false, for they lead — ex-
amined in sequence — to logical contradictions.
In all scientific determinations we always reckon
inevitably with certain false quantities, but as these
quantities are at least constant, as, for instance,
our sensation of time and space, the conclusions
of science have still perfect accuracy and certainty
in their connection with one another ; one may
continue to build upon them — until that final limit
where the erroneous original suppositions, those
constant faults, come into conflict with the con-
clusions, for instance in the doctrine of atoms.
There still we always feel ourselves compelled to
the acceptance of a " thing " or material " sub-
stratum " that is moved, whilst the whole scientific
procedure has pursued the very task of resolving
everything substantial (material) into motion ; here,
too, we still separate with our sensation the mover
and the moved and cannot get out of this circle,
because the belief in things has from immemorial
times been bound up with our being. When Kant
says, " The understanding does not derive its
laws from Nature, but dictates them to her," it is
perfectly true with regard to the idea of Nature
which we are compelled to associate with her
(Nature = World as representation, that is to say
as error), but which is the summing up of a
number of errors of the understanding. The laws



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 35

of numbers are entirely inapplicable to a world
which is not our representation — these laws obtain
only in the human world.



20.

A Few Steps Back. — A degree of culture,
and assuredly a very high one, is attained when
man rises above superstitious and religious notions
and fears, and, for instance, no longer believes in
guardian angels or in original sin, and has also
ceased to talk of the salvation of his soul, — if he
has attained to this degree of freedom, he has still
also to overcome metaphysics with the greatest
exertion of his intelligence. Then, however, a re-
trogressive movement is necessary ; he must under-
stand the historical justification as well as the
psychological in such representations, he must
recognise how the greatest advancement of
humanity has come therefrom, and how, without
such a retrocursive movement, we should have
been robbed of the best products of hitherto
existing mankind. With regard to philosophical
metaphysics, I always see increasing numbers
who have attained to the negative goal (that all
positive metaphysics is error), but as yet few who
climb a few rungs backwards ; one ought to look
out, perhaps, over the last steps of the ladder, but
not try to stand upon them. The most enlightened
only succeed so far as to free themselves from
metaphysics and look back upon it with superiority,
while it is necessary here, too, as in the hippo-
drome, to turn round the end of the course.



36 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

21.

Conjectural Victory of Scepticism. — For
once let the sceptical starting-point be accepted,
— granted that there were no other metaphysical
world, and all explanations drawn from meta-
physics about the only world we know were useless
to us, in what light should we then look upon
men and things ? We can think this out for
ourselves, it is useful, even though the question
whether anything metaphysical has been scientific-
ally proved by Kant and Schopenhauer were
altogether set aside. For it is quite possible,
according to historical probability, that some time
or other man, as a general rule, may grow sceptical ;
the question will then be this : What form will
human society take under the influence of such a
mode of thought ? Perhaps the scientific proof of
some metaphysical world or other is already so
difficult that mankind will never get rid of a cer-
tain distrust of it. And when there is distrust
of metaphysics, there are on the whole the same
results as if it had been directly refuted and could
no longer be believed in. The historical question
with regard to an unmetaphysical frame of mind
in mankind remains the same in both cases.



22.

Unbelief in the " Monumentum ^re per-
ENNius." — An actual drawback which accom-
panies the cessation of metaphysical views lies in the
fact that the individual looks upon his short span




FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 37

of life too exclusively and receives no stronger in-
centives to build durable institutions intended to
last for centuries, — he himself wishes to pluck the
fruit from the tree which he plants, and therefore
he no longer plants those trees which require
regular care for centuries, and which are destined
to afford shade to a long series of generations.
For metaphysical views furnish the belief that in
them the last conclusive foundation has been given,
upon which henceforth all the future of mankind
is compelled to settle down and establish itself ;
the individual furthers his salvation, when, for
instance, he founds a church or convent, he thinks
it will be reckoned to him and recompensed to
him in the eternal life of the soul, it is work for
the soul's eternal salvation. Can science also
arouse such faith in its results ? As a matter of
fact, it needs doubt and distrust as its most faithful
auxiliaries ; nevertheless in the course of time, the
sum of inviolable truths — those, namely, which
have weathered all the storms of scepticism, and
all destructive analysis — may have become so great
(in the regimen of health, for instance), that one
may determine to found thereupon "eternal" works.
For the present the contrast between our excited
ephemeral existence and the long-winded repose
of metaphysical ages still operates too strongly,
because the two ages still stand too closely
together ; the individual man himself now goes
through too many inward and outward develop-
ments for him to venture to arrange his own
lifetime permanently, and once and for all. An
entirely modern man, for instance, who is going



38 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

to build himself a house, has a feeling as if he
were going to immure himself alive in a mausoleum.^



23.

The Age of Comparison. — The less men are
fettered by tradition, the greater becomes the
inward activity of their motives ; the greater, again,
in proportion thereto, the outward restlessness, the
confused flux of mankind, the polyphony of striv-
ings. For whom is there still an absolute com-
pulsion to bind himself and his descendants to one
place ? For whom is there still anything strictly
compulsory? As all styles of arts are imitated
simultaneously, so also are all grades and kinds of
morality, of customs, of cultures. Such an age
obtains its importance because in it the various
views of the world, customs, and cultures can be
compared and experienced simultaneously, — which
was formerly not possible with the always localised
sway of every culture, corresponding to the root-
ing of all artistic styles in place and time.
An increased aesthetic feeling will now at last
decide amongst so many forms presenting them-
selves for comparison ; it will allow the greater
number, that is to say all those rejected by it, to
die out. In the same way a selection amongst
the forms and customs of the higher moralities is
taking place, of which the aim can be nothing
else than the downfall of the lower moralities.
It is the age of comparison ! That is its pride,
but more justly also its grief. Let us not be
afraid of this grief! Rather will we comprehend



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 39

as adequately as possible the task our age sets us :
posterity will bless us for doing so, — a posterity
which knows itself to be as much above the
terminated original national cultures as above the
culture of comparison, but which looks back with
gratitude on both kinds of culture as upon
antiquities worthy of veneration.



24.

The Possibility of Progress. — When a
scholar of the ancient culture forswears the
company of men who believe in progress, he
does quite right. For the greatness and good-
ness of ancient culture lie behind it, and historical
education compels one to admit that they can
never be fresh again ; an unbearable stupidity or
an equally insufferable fanaticism would be neces-
sary to deny this. But men can consciously resolve
to develop themselves towards a new culture;
whilst formerly they only developed unconsciously
and by chance, they can now create better con-
ditions for the rise of human beings, for their
nourishment, education and instruction ; they can
administer the earth economically as a whole, and
can generally weigh and restrain the powers of
man. This new, conscious culture kills the old,
which, regarded as a whole, has led an unconscious
animal and plant life ; it also kills distrust in
progress, — progress \s possible. I must say that it
is over-hasty and almost nonsensical to believe
that progress must necessarily follow ; but how
could one deny that it is possible? On the



40 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Other hand, progress in the sense and on the
path of the old culture is not even thinkable.
Even if romantic fantasy has also constantly used
the word " progress " to denote its aims (for in-
stance, circumscribed primitive national cultures),
it borrows the picture of it in any case from the
past ; its thoughts and ideas on this subject are
entirely without originality.



25.

Private and CEcumenical Morality. —
Since the belief has ceased that a God directs in
general the fate of the world and, in spite of all
apparent crookedness in the path of humanity,
leads it on gloriously, men themselves must set
themselves oecumenical aims embracing the whole
earth. The older morality, especially that of
Kant, required from the individual actions which
were desired from all men, — that was a delight-
fully naive thing, as if each one knew off-hand
what course of action was beneficial to the whole
of humanity, and consequently which actions in
general were desirable ; it is a theory like that of
free trade, taking for granted that the general
harmony must result of itself according to innate
laws of amelioration. Perhaps a future contem-
plation of the needs of humanity will show that
it is by no means desirable that all men should
act alike ; in the interest of oecumenical aims it
might rather be that for whole sections of man-
kind, special, and perhaps under certain circum-
stances even evil, tasks would have to be set. In



I



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 41

any case, if mankind is not to destroy itself by
such a conscious universal rule, there must pre-
viously be found, as a scientific standard for
oecumenical aims, a knowledge of the conditions of
culture superior to what has hitherto been attained.
Herein lies the enormous task of the great minds
of the next century.

26.

Reaction as Progress. — Now and again
there appear rugged, powerful, impetuous, but
nevertheless backward-lagging minds which con-
jure up once more a past phase of mankind ; they
serve to prove that the new tendencies against
which they are working are not yet sufficiently
strong, that they still lack something, otherwise
they would show better opposition to those
exorcisers. Thus, for example, Luther's Re-
formation bears witness to the fact that in his
century all the movements of the freedom of the
spirit were still uncertain, tender, and youthful ;
science could not yet lift up its head. Indeed
the whole Renaissance seems like an early spring
which is almost snowed under again. But in this
century also, Schopenhauer's Metaphysics showed
that even now the scientific spirit is not yet strong
enough ; thus the whole mediaeval Christian view
of the world and human feeling could celebrate
its resurrection in Schopenhauer's doctrine, in spite
of the long achieved destruction of all Christian
dogmas. There is much science in his doctrine,
but it does not dominate it : it is rather the old
well - known " metaphysical requirement " that



42 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

does so. It is certainly one of the greatest and
quite invaluable advantages which we gain from
Schopenhauer, that he occasionally forces our
sensations back into older, mightier modes of
contemplating the world and man, to which no
other path would so easily lead us. The gain to
history and justice is very great, — I do not think
that any one would so easily succeed now in doing
justice to Christianity and its Asiatic relations
without Schopenhauer's assistance, which is speci-
ally impossible from the basis of still existing
Christianity. Only after this great success of
justice, only after we have corrected so essential
a point as the historical mode of contemplation
which the age of enlightenment brought with it,
may we again bear onward the banner of en-
lightenment, the banner with the three names,
Petrarch, Erasmus, Voltaire. We have turned
reaction into progress.

27.

A Substitute for Religion. — It is believed
that something good is said of philosophy when
it is put forward as a substitute for religion for
the people. As a matter of fact, in the spiritual
economy there is need, at times, of an intermediary
order of thought : the transition from religion to
scientific contemplation is a violent, dangerous
leap, which is not to be recommended. To this
extent the recommendation is justifiable. But
one should eventually learn that the needs which
have been satisfied by religion and are now to
be satisfied by philosophy are not unchangeable ;



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 43

these themselves can be weakened and eradicated.
Think, for instance, of the Christian's distress of
soul, his sighing over inward corruption, his anxiety
for salvation, — all notions which originate only in
errors of reason and deserve not satisfaction but
destruction. A philosophy can serve either to
satisfy those needs or to set them aside ; for they
are acquired, temporally limited needs, which are
based upon suppositions contradictory to those
of science. Here, in order to make a transition,
art is far rather to be employed to relieve the mind
over-burdened with emotions; for those notions
receive much less support from it than from a
metaphysical philosophy. It is easier, then, to
pass over from art to a really liberating philo-
sophical science.

28.

Ill-famed Words. — Away with those weari-
somely hackneyed terms Optimism and Pessimism !
For the occasion for using them becomes less and
less from day to day ; only the chatterboxes still
find them so absolutely necessary. For why in
all the world should any one wish to be an optimist
unless he had a God to defend who must have
created the best of worlds if he himself be goodness
and perfection, — what thinker, however, still needs
the hypothesis of a God ? But every occasion for
a pessimistic confession of faith is also lacking when
one has no interest in being annoyed at the advo-
cates of God (the theologians, or the theologising
philosophers), and in energetically defending the
opposite view, that evil reigns, that pain is greater



44 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

than pleasure, that the world is a bungled piece of
work, the manifestation of an ill-will to life. But
who still bothers about the theologians now —
except the theologians ? Apart from all theology
and its contentions, it is quite clear that the world
is not good and not bad (to say nothing of its
being the best or the worst), and that the terms
" good " and " bad " have only significance with
respect to man, and indeed, perhaps, they are not
justified even here in the way they are usually
employed ; in any case we must get rid of both
the calumniating and the glorifying conception of
the world.

29.

Intoxicated by the Scent of the
Blossoms. — It is supposed that the ship of
humanity has always a deeper draught, the heavier
it is laden ; it is believed that the deeper a man
thinks, the more delicately he feels, the higher he
values himself, the greater his distance from the
other animals, — the more he appears as a genius
amongst the animals, — all the nearer will he
approach the real essence of the world and its
knowledge ; this he actually does too, through
science, but he means to do so still more through
his religions and arts. These certainly are
blossoms of the world, but by no means any
nearer to the root of the world than the stalk ; it
is not possible to understand the nature of things
better through them, although almost every one
believes he can. Error has made man so deep,
sensitive, and inventive that he has put forth such



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 45

blossoms as religions and arts. Pure knowledge
could not have been capable of it. Whoever
were to unveil for us the essence of the world
would give us all the most disagreeable disillusion-
ment. Not the world as thing-in-itself, but the
world as representation (as error) is so full of
meaning, so deep, so wonderful, bearing happiness
and unhappiness in its bosom. This result leads
to a philosophy of the logical denial of the world,
which, however, can be combined with a practical
world-affirming just as well as with its opposite.

30.

Bad Habits in Reasoning. — The usual false
conclusions of mankind are these : a thing exists,
therefore it has a right to exist. Here there is
inference from the ability to live to its suitability ;
from its suitability to its rightfulness. Then : an
opinion brings happiness ; therefore it is the true
opinion. Its effect is good ; therefore it is itself
good and true. To the effect is here assigned
the predicate beneficent, good, in the sense of the
useful, and the cause is then furnished with the
same predicate good, but here in the sense of
the logically valid. The inversion of the sentences
would read thus : an affair cannot be carried
through, or maintained, therefore it is wrong ; an
opinion causes pain or excites, therefore it is false.
The free spirit who learns only too often the
faultiness of this mode of reasoning, and has to
suffer from its consequences, frequently gives way
to the temptation to draw the very opposite



46 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

conclusions, which, in general, are naturally just
as false : an affair cannot be carried through,
therefore it is good ; an opinion is distressing and
disturbing, therefore it is true.



31.

The Illogical Necessary. — One of those
things that may drive a thinker into despair is the
recognition of the fact that the illogical is necessary
for man, and that out of the illogical comes much
that is good. It is so firmly rooted in the passions,
in language, in art, in religion, and generally in
everything that gives value to life, that it cannot
be withdrawn without thereby hopelessly injuring
these beautiful things. It is only the all-too-naive
people who can believe that the nature of man
can be changed into a purely logical one ; but if
there were degrees of proximity to this goal, how
many things would not have to be lost on this
course ! Even the most rational man has need of
nature again from time to time, i.e. his illogical
fundamental attitude towards all things.

32.

Injustice Necessary. — All judgments on the
value of life are illogically developed, and therefore
unjust. The inexactitude of the judgment lies,
firstly, in the manner in which the material is
presented, namely very imperfectly ; secondly, in
the manner in which the conclusion is formed out
of it ; and thirdly, in the fact that every separate



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 47

element of the material is again the result of
vitiated recognition, and this, too, of necessity.
For instance, no experience of an individual,
however near he may stand to us, can be perfect,
so that we could have a logical right to make a
complete estimate of him ; all estimates are rash,
and must be so. Finally, the standard by which
we measure, our nature, is not of unalterable
dimensions, — we have moods and vacillations,
and yet we should have to recognise ourselves as
a fixed standard in order to estimate correctly the
relation of any thing whatever to ourselves. From
this it will, perhaps, follow that we should make
no judgments at all ; if one could only live without
making estimations, without having likes and
dislikes ! For all dislike is connected with an
estimation, as well as all incUnation. An impulse
towards or away from anything without a feeling
that something advantageous is desired, something
injurious avoided, an impulse without any kind of
conscious valuation of the worth of the aim does
not exist in man. We are from the beginning
illogical, and therefore unjust beings, and can
recognise this ; it is one of the greatest and most
inexplicable discords of existence.



33.

Error about Life necessary for Life. —
Every belief in the value and worthiness of life is
based on vitiated thought ; it is only possible
through the fact that sympathy for the general life
and suffering of mankind is very weakly developed



48 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

in the individual. Even the rarer people who
think outside themselves do not contemplate this
general life, but only a limited part of it. If one
understands how to direct one's attention chiefly
to the exceptions, — I mean to the highly gifted and
the rich souls, — if one regards the production of
these as the aim of the whole world-development
and rejoices in its operation, then one may
believe in the value of life, because one thereby
overlooks the other men — one consequently thinks
fallaciously. So too, when one directs one's
attention to all mankind, but only considers one
species of impulses in them, the less egoistical
ones, and excuses them with regard to the other
instincts, one may then again entertain hopes of
mankind in general and believe so far in the value
of life, consequently in this case also through
fallaciousness of thought. Let one, however,
behave in this or that manner: with such
behaviour one is an exception amongst men.
Now, most people bear life without any consider-
able grumbling, and consequently believe in the
value of existence, but precisely because each one is
solely self-seeking and self-affirming, and does not
step out of himself like those exceptions ; every-
thing extra-personal is imperceptible to them, or
at most seems only a faint shadow. Therefore on
this alone is based the value of life for the ordinary
everyday man, that he regards himself as more
important than the world. The great lack of
imagination from which he suffers is the reason why
he cannot enter into the feelings of other beings,
and therefore sympathises as little as possible with



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 49

their fate and suffering. He, on the other hand,
who really could sympathise therewith, would have
to despair of the value of life ; were he to succeed
in comprehending and feeling in himself the
general consciousness of mankind, he would
collapse with a curse on existence; for mankind
as a whole has no goals, consequently man, in
considering his whole course, cannot find in it his
comfort and support, but his despair. If, in all
that he does, he considers the final aimlessness of
man, his own activity assumes in his eyes the
character of wastefulness. But to feel one's self
just as much wasted as humanity (and not only
as an individual) as we see the single blossom of
nature wasted, is a feeling above all other feelings.
But who is capable of it? Assuredly only a
poet, and poets always know how to console
themselves.

34.

For Tranquillity. — But does not our philo-
sophy thus become a tragedy? Does not truth
become hostile to life, to improvement ? A ques-
tion seems to weigh upon our tongue and yet
hesitate to make itself heard : whether one can
consciously remain in untruthfulness ? or, supposing
one were obliged to do this, would not death be
preferable ? For there is no longer any " must " ;
morality, in so far as it had any " must " or " shalt,
has been destroyed by our mode of contemplation,
just as religion has been destroyed. Knowledge
can only allow pleasure and pain, benefit and in-
jury to subsist as motives ; but how will these




50 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

motives agree with the sense of truth ? They also
contain errors (for, as already said, inclination and
aversion, and their very incorrect determinations,
practically regulate our pleasure and pain). The
whole of human life is deeply immersed in un-
truthfulness ; the individual cannot draw it up out
of this well, without thereby taking a deep dislike to
his whole past, without finding his present motives
— those of honour, for instance — inconsistent, and
without opposing scorn and disdain to the passions
which conduce to happiness in the future. Is it
true that there remains but one sole way of think-
ing which brings after it despair as a personal
experience, as a theoretical result, a philosophy of
dissolution, disintegration, and self-destruction ? I
believe that the decision with regard to the after-
effects of the knowledge will be given through the
temperament of a man ; I could imagine another
after-effect, just as well as that one described, which
is possible in certain natures, by means of which a
life would arise much simpler, freer from emotions
than is the present one, so that though at first,
indeed, the old motives of passionate desire might
still have strength from old hereditary habit, they
•would gradually become weaker under the influence -
of purifying knowledge. One would live at last
amongst men, and with one's self as with Nature,
without praise, reproach, or agitation, feasting one's
eyes, as if it were a play, upon much of which one
was formerly afraid. One would be free from the
emphasis, and would no longer feel the goading, of
the thought that one is not only nature or more
than nature. Certainly, as already remarked, a



FIRST AND LAST THINGS. 5 1

good temperament would be necessary for this, an
even, mild, and naturally joyous soul, a disposition
which would not always need to be on its guard
against spite and sudden outbreaks, and would
not convey in its utterances anything of a grumb-
ling or sudden nature, — those well-known vexatious
qualities of old dogs and men who have been long
chained up. On the contrary, a man from whom
the ordinary fetters of life have so far fallen that
he continues to live only for the sake of ever better
knowledge must be able to renounce without envy
and regret : much, indeed almost everything that is
precious to other men, he must regard as the all-
sufficing and the most desirable condition ; the free,
fearless soaring pver men, customs, laws, and the
traditional valuations of things. The joy of this
condition he imparts willingly, and he has perhaps
nothing else to impart, — wherein, to be sure, there
is more privation and renunciation. If, nevertheless,
more is demanded from him, he will point with a
friendly shake of his head to his brother, the free
man of action, and will perhaps not conceal a little
derision, for as regards this " freedom " it is a very
peculiar case.



SECOND DIVISION.

THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL
SENTIMENTS.

35-
Advantages of Psychological Observa-
tion. — That reflection on the human, all-too-
human — or, according to the learned expression,
psychological observation — is one of the means
by which one may lighten the burden of life, that
exercise in this art produces presence of mind in
difficult circumstances, in the midst of tiresome
surroundings, even that from the most thorny and
unpleasant periods of one's own life one may gather
maxims and thereby feel a little better: all this
was believed, was known in former centuries. Why
was it forgotten by our century, when in Germany
at least, even in all Europe, the poverty of
psychological observation betrays itself by many
signs? Not exactly in novels, tales, and philo-
sophical treatises, — they are the work of exceptional
individuals, — rather in the judgments on public
events and personalities ; but above all there is a
lack of the art of psychological analysis and sum-
ming-up in every rank of society, in which a great
deal is talked about men, but nothing about man.
Why do we allow the richest and most harmless



54 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

subject of conversation to escape us ? Why are
not the great masters of psychological maxims
more read ? For, without any exaggeration, the
educated man in Europe who has read La Roche-
foucauld and his kindred in mind and art, is rarely
found, and still more rare is he who knows them
and does not blame them. It is probable, how-
ever, that even this exceptional reader will find
much less pleasure in them than the form of this
artist should afford him ; for even the clearest head
is not capable of rightly estimating the art of
shaping and polishing maxims unless he has really
been brought up to it and has competed in it.
Without this practical teaching one deems this
shaping and polishing to be easier than it is ; one
has not a sufficient perception of fitness and charm.
For this reason the present readers of maxims find
in them a comparatively small pleasure, hardly
a mouthful of pleasantness, so that they resemble
the people who generally look at cameos, who
praise because they cannot love, and are very ready
to admire, but still more ready to run away.

36.

Objection. — Or should there be a counter-
reckoning to that theory that places psychological
observation amongst the means of charming, curing,
and relieving existence? Should one have suffi-
ciently convinced one's self of the unpleasant con-
sequences of this art to divert from it designedly
the attention of him who is educating himself in it?
As a matter of fact, a certain blind belief in the



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 55

goodness of human nature, an innate aversion to
the analysis of human actions, a kind of shame-
facedness with respect to the nakedness of the soul
may really be more desirable for the general well-
being of a man than that quality, useful in iso-
lated cases, of psychological sharp-sightedness ; and
perhaps the belief in goodness, in virtuous men
and deeds, in an abundance of impersonal good-
will in the world, has made men better inasmuch
as it has made them less distrustful. When one
imitates Plutarch's heroes with enthusiasm, and
turns with disgust from a suspicious examination
of the motives for their actions, it is not truth
which benefits thereby, but the welfare of human
society ; the psychological mistake and, generally
speaking, the insensibility on this matter helps
humanity forwards, while the recognition of truth
gains more through the stimulating power of
hypothesis than La Rochefoucauld has said in his
preface to the first edition of his " Sentences et
maximes morales!' . . . " CV que le monde noinme
vertu n'est (T ordinaire qu^un fantdme form^ par nos
passions, d qui on donne un nom honnete pour f aire
impun^ment ce qu'on veut." La Rochefoucauld and
those other French masters of soul-examination
(who have lately been joined by a German, the
author of Psychological Observations *) resemble
good marksmen who again and again hit the
bull's-eye ; but it is the bull's-eye of human nature.
Their art arouses astonishment ; but in the end a
spectator who is not led by the spirit of science,




56 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-IIUMAN.

but by humane intentions, will probably execrate an
art which appears to implant in the soul the sense
of the disparagement and suspicion of mankind.



Nevertheless. — However it may be with
reckoning and counter-reckoning, in the present
condition of philosophy the awakening of moral
observation is necessary. Humanity can no
longer be spared the cruel sight of the psycho-
logical dissecting-table with its knives and forceps.
For here rules that science which inquires into
the origin and history of the so-called moral
sentiments, and which, in its progress, has to
draw up and solve complicated sociological
problems : — the older philosophy knows the
latter one not at all, and has always avoided the
examination of the origin and history of moral
sentiments on any feeble pretext. With what
consequences it is now very easy to see, after it
has been shown by many examples how the
mistakes of the greatest philosophers generally
have their starting-point in a wrong explanation
of certain human actions and sensations, just as
on the ground of an erroneous analysis — for
instance, that of the so-called unselfish actions —
a false ethic is built up ; then, to harmonise with
this again, religion and mythological confusion
are brought in to assist, and finally the shades
of these dismal spirits fall also over physics and
the general mode of regarding the world. If it
is certain, however, that superficiality in psycho-


THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 57

logical observation has laid, and still lays, the
most dangerous snares for human judgments and
conclusions, then there is need now of that
endurance of work which does not grow weary
of piling stone upon stone, pebble on pebble;
there is need of courage not to be ashamed of
such humble work and to turn a deaf ear to
scorn. And this is also true, — numberless single
observations on the human and all-too-human
have first been discovered, and given utterance to,
in circles of society which were accustomed to
offer sacrifice therewith to a clever desire to please,
and not to scientific knowledge, — and the odour
of that old home of the moral maxim, a very
seductive odour, has attached itself almost in-
separably to the whole species, so that on its
account the scientific man involuntarily betrays a
certain distrust of this species and its earnestness.
But it is sufficient to point to the consequences,
for already it begins to be seen what results of
a serious kind spring from the ground of psycho-
logical observation. What, after all, is the
principal axiom to which the boldest and coldest
thinker, the author of the book On the Origin of
Moral Sensations^ has attained by means of his
incisive and decisive analyses of human' actions?
" The moral man," he says, " is no nearer to the
intelligible (metaphysical) world than is the
physical man." This theory, hardened and
sharpened under the hammer-blow of historical
knowledge, may some time or other, perhaps in




58 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

some future period, serve as the axe which is
applied to the root of the " metaphysical need "
of man, — whether more as a blessing than a
curse to the general welfare it is not easy to
say, but in any case as a theory with the most
important consequences, at once fruitful and
terrible, and looking into the world with that
Janus-face which all great knowledge possesses.



38.

How FAR Useful. — It must remain for ever
undecided whether psychological observation is
advantageous or disadvantageous to man ; but it
is certain that it is necessary, because science
cannot do without it. Science, however, has no
consideration for ultimate purposes, any more
than Nature has, but just as the latter occasion-
ally achieves things of the greatest suitableness
without intending to do so, so also true science,
as the imitator of nature in ideas, will occasion-
ally and in many ways further the usefulness
and welfare of man, — but also without intending
to do so.

But whoever feels too chilled by the breath of
such a reflection has perhaps too little fire in him-
self; let him look around him meanwhile and he
will become aware of illnesses which have need of
ice-poultices, and of men who are so " kneaded
together " of heat and spirit that they can hardly
find an atmosphere that is cold and biting enough.
Moreover, as individuals and nations that are too
serious have need of frivolities, as others too



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 59

mobile and excitable have need occasionally of
heavily oppressing burdens for the sake of their
health, should not we, the more intellectual people
of this age, that grows visibly more and more
inflamed, seize all quenching and cooling means
that exist, in order that we may at least remain
as constant, harmless, and moderate as we still
are, and thus, perhaps, serve some time or other
as mirror and self-contemplation for this age?



^39.

The Fable of Intelligible Freedom. —
The history of the sentiments by means of which
we make a person responsible consists of the
following principal phases. First, all single actions
are called good or bad without any regard to
their motives, but only on account of the useful
or injurious consequences which result for the
community. But soon the origin of these dis-
tinctions is forgotten, and it is deemed that the
qualities " good " or " bad " are contained in the
; action itself without regard to its consequences,
by the same error according to which language
describes the stone as hard, the tree as green, — with
which, in short, the result is regarded as the cause.
Then the goodness or badness is implanted in the
motive, and the action in itself is looked upon as
morally ambiguous. Mankind even goes further,
[and applies the predicate good or bad no longer
to single motives, but to the whole nature of an
individual, out of whom the motive grows as the
plant grows out of the earth. Thus, in turn, man



60 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

is made responsible for his operations, then for his
actions, then for his motives, abd finally for his
nature. Eventually it is discovered that even this
nature cannot be responsible, inasmuch as it is an
absolutely necessary consequence concreted out of
the elements and influences of past and present
things, — that man, therefore, cannot be made re-
sponsible for anything, neither for his nature, nor
his motives, nor his actions, nor his effects. It has
therewith come to be recognised that the history
of moral valuations is at the same time the history
of an error, the error of responsibility, which is
based upon the error of the freedom of will.
Schopenhauer thus decided against it : because
certain actions bring ill humour (" consciousness
of guilt") in their train, there must be a re-
sponsibility ; for there would be no reason for this
ill humour if not only all human actions were not
done of necessity, — which is actually the case and
also the belief of this philosopher, — but man him-
self from the same necessity is precisely the being
that he is — which Schopenhauer denies. From
the fact of that ill humour Schopenhauer thinks
he can prove a liberty which man must somehow
have had, not with regard to actions, but with
regard to nature; liberty, therefore, to be thus or
otherwise, not to act thus or otherwise. From the
esse, the sphere of freedom and responsibility, there
results, in his opinion, the operari, the sphere of
strict causality, necessity, and irresponsibility. This
ill humour is apparently directed to the operari, — in
so far it is erroneous, — but in reality it is directed
to the esse, which is the deed of a free will, the



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 6l

fundamental cause of the existence of an individual,
man becomes that which he wishes to be, his will
is anterior to his existence. Here the mistaken
conclusion is drawn that from the fact of the ill
humour, the justification, the reasonable admissable-
ness of this ill humour is presupposed ; and start-
ing from this mistaken conclusion, Schopenhauer
arrives at his fantastic sequence of the so-called
intelligible freedom. But the ill humour after the
deed is not necessarily reasonable, indeed it is
assuredly not reasonable, for it is based upon the
erroneous presumption that the action need not
have inevitably followed. Therefore, it is only
because man believes himself to be free, not
because he is free, that he experiences remorse
and pricks of conscience. Moreover, this ill
humour is a habit that can be broken off; in
many people it is entirely absent in connection
with actions where others experience it. It is a
very changeable thing, and one which is connected
with the development of customs and culture, and
probably only existing during a comparatively
short period of the world's history. Nobody is
responsible for his actions, nobody for his nature ;
40 judge is identical with being unjust. This also
applies when an individual judges himself. The
theory is as clear as sunlight, and yet every one
prefers to go back into the shadow and the un-
truth, for fear of the consequences.

The Super-Animal. — The beast in us wishes
to be deceived ; morality is a lie of necessity in



62 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

order that we may not be torn in pieces by it.
Without the errors which lie in the assumption of
morality, man would have remained an animal.
Thus, however, he has considered himself as
something higher and has laid strict laws upon
himself. Therefore he hates the grades which
have remained nearer to animalness, whereby the
former scorn of the slave, as a not-yet-man, is to
be explained as a fact.



41.

The Unchangeable Character. — That the
character is unchangeable is not true in a strict
sense ; this favourite theory means, rather, that
during the short lifetime of an individual the new
influencing motives cannot penetrate deeply enough
to destroy the ingrained marks of many thousands
of years. But if one were to imagine a man of
eighty thousand years, one would have in him an
absolutely changeable character, so that a number
of different individuals would gradually develop
out of him. The shortness of human life misleads
us into forming many erroneous ideas about the
qualities of man.

42.

The Order of Possessions and Morality.
— The once-accepted hierarchy of possessions,
according as this or the other is coveted by a
lower, higher, or highest egoism, now decides
what is moral or immoral. To prefer a lesser
good (for instance, the gratification of the senses)



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 63

to a more highly valued good (for instance, health)
is accounted immoral, and also to prefer luxury
to liberty. The hierarchy of possessions, however,
is not fixed and equal at all times ; if any one pre-
fers vengeance to justice he is moral according to
the standard of an earlier civilisation, but immoral
according to the present one. To be " immoral,"
therefore, denotes that an individual has not felt,
or not felt sufficiently strongly, the higher, finer,
spiritual motives which have come in with a
new culture ; it marks one who has remained
behind, but only according to the difference of
degrees. The order of possessions itself is not
raised and lowered according to a moral point
of view ; but each time that it is fixed it sup-
plies the decision as to whether an action is moral
or immoral.

43.

Cruel People as Those who have Re-
mained Behind, — People who are cruel now-
adays must be accounted for by us as the grades
of earlier civilisations which have survived ;
here are exposed those deeper formations in
the mountain of humanity which usually remain
concealed. They are backward people whose
brains, through all manner of accidents in the course
of inheritance, have not been developed in so
delicate and manifold a way. They show us
what we all were and horrify us, but they them-
selves are as little responsible as is a block of
granite for being granite. There must, too, be
grooves and twists in our brains which answer to



64 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that condition of mind, as in the form of certain
human organs there are supposed to be traces of
a fish-state. But these grooves and twists are no
longer the bed through which the stream of our
sensation flows.

44.

Gratitude and Revenge. — The reason why
the powerful man is grateful is this : his bene-
factor, through the benefit he confers, has mistaken
and intruded into the sphere of the powerful man,
— jiow the latter, in return, penetrates into the
sphere of the benefactor by the act of gratitude.
It is a milder form of revenge. Without the
satisfaction of gratitude, the powerful man would
have shown himself powerless, and would have
been reckoned as such ever after. Therefore
every society of the good, which originally meant
the powerful, places gratitude amongst the first
duties. — Swift propounded the maxim that men
were grateful in the same proportion as they were
revengeful.

45.

The Twofold Early History of Good
and Evil. — The conception of good and evil
has a twofold early history, namelyyonce in the
soul of the xuling tribes and castes. Whoever has
the power of returning good for good, evil for evil,
and really practises requital, and who is, therefore,
grateful and revengeful, is called good ; whoever
is powerless, and unable to requite, is reckoned as
bad. As a good man one is reckoned ^mong the



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 6$

" good," a community which has common feelings
because the single individuals are bound to one
another by the sense of requital. As a bad man
one belongs to the " bad," to a party of subordinate,
powerless people who have no common feeling.
The good are a paste, the bad are a cnass like
dust. Good and bad have for a long time meant
the same thing as noble and base, master and
slave. On the other hand, the enemy is not
looked upon as evil, he can requite. In Homer
the Trojan and the Greek are both good. It is
not the one who injures us, but the one who is
despicable, who is called bad. Good is inherited
in the community of the good ; it is impossible
that a bad man could spring from such good
soil. If, nevertheless, one of the good ones does
something which is unworthy of the good, refuge
is sought in excuses; the guilt is thrown upon
a god, for instance ; it is said that he has struck
the good man with blindness and madness. —

T/ten in the soul of the oppressed and powerless.
Here every ether man is looked upon as hostile,
inconsiderate, rapacious, cruel, cunning, be he
noble or base ; evil is the distinguishing word for
man, even for every conceivable living creature,
e.g: for a god ; human, divine, is the same thing
as devilish, evil. The signs of goodness, helpful-
ness, pity, are looked upon with fear as spite, the
prelude to a terrible result, stupefaction and out-
witting, — in short, as refined malice. With such a
disposition in the individual a community could
hardly exist, or at most it could exist only in its
rudest form, so that in all places where this con-




66 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ception of good and evil obtains, the downfall of
the single individuals, of their tribes and races, is
at hand. — Our present civilisation has grown up
on the soil of the ^-uling tribes and castes.



46.

Sympathy Stronger than Suffering. —
There are cases when sympathy is stronger than
actual suffering. For instance, we are more pained
when one of our friends is guilty of something
shameful than when we do it ourselves. For one
thing, we have more faith in the purity of his
character than he has himself; then our love for
him, probably on account of this very faith, is
stronger than his love for himself. And even if
his egoism suffers more thereby than our egoism,
inasmuch as it has to bear more of the bad con-
sequences of his fault, the un-egoistic in us — this
word is not to be taken too seriously, but only as
a modification of the expression — is more deeply
wounded by his guilt than is the un-egoistic in
him.

47.

Hypochondria. — There are people who be-
come hypochondriacal through their sympathy and
concern for another person ; the kind of sympathy
which results therefrom is nothing but a disease.
Thus there is also a Christian hypochondria, which
afflicts those solitary, religiously-minded people
who keep constantly before their eyes the suffer-
ings and death of Christ,



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 6j
48.

Economy of Goodness. — Goodness and love,
as the most healing herbs and powers in human
intercourse, are such costly discoveries that one
would wish as much economy as possible to be
exercised in the employment of these balsamic
means ; but this is impossible. The economy
of goodness is the dream of the most daring
Utopians.

49.

Goodwill. — Amongst the small, but count-
lessly frequent and therefore very effective, things
to which science should pay more attention than
to the great, rare things, is to be reckoned good-
will ; I mean that exhibition of a friendly dis-
position in intercourse, that smiling eye, that clasp
of the hand, that cheerfulness with which almost
all human actions are usually accompanied.
Every teacher, every official, adds this to whatever
is his duty; it is the perpetual occupation of
humanity, and at the same time the waves of its
light, in which everything grows ; in the narrowest
circle, namely, within the family, life blooms and
flourishes only through that goodwill. Kindli-
ness, friendliness, the courtesy of the heart, are
ever-flowing streams of un-egoistic impulses, and
have given far more powerful assistance to culture
than even those much more famous demonstra-
tions which are called pity, mercy, and self-
sacrifice. But they are thought little of, and, as a

atter of fact, there is not much that is un-egoistic



I



68 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

in them. The sum of these small doses is never-
theless mighty, their united force is amongst the
strongest forces. Thus one finds much more
happiness in the world than sad eyes see, if one
only reckons rightly, and does not forget all those
moments of comfort in which every day is rich,
even in the most harried of human lives.



50.

The Wish to arouse Pity. — In the most
remarkable passage of his auto - portrait (first
printed in 1658), La Rochefoucauld assuredly
hits the nail on the head when he warns all
sensible people against pity, when he advises them
to leave that to those orders of the people who
have need of passion (because it is not ruled by
reason), and to reach the point of helping the
suffering and acting energetically in an accident ;
while pity, according to his (and Plato's) judgment,
weakens the soul. Certainly we should exhibit
pity, but take good care not to feel it, for the
unfortunate are so stupid that to them the
exhibition of pity is the greatest good in the
world. One can, perhaps, give a more forcible
warning against this feeling of pity if one looks
upon that need of the unfortunate not exactly as
stupidity and lack of intellect, a kind of mental
derangement which misfortune brings with it (and
as such, indeed, La Rochefoucauld appears to
regard it), but as something quite different and
more serious. Observe children, who cry and
scream in order to be pitied, and therefore wait



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 69

for the moment when they will be noticed ; live in
intercourse with the sick and mentally oppressed,
and ask yourself whether that ready complaining
and whimpering, that making a show of mis-
fortune, does not, at bottom, aim at making the
spectators miserable; the pity which the spectators
then exhibit is in so far a consolation for the weak
and suffering in that the latter recognise therein
that ihey possess still one power, in spite of their
weakness, the power of giving pain. The un-
fortunate derives a sort of pleasure from this
feeling of superiority, of which the exhibition of
pity makes him conscious ; his imagination is
exalted, he is still powerful enough to give the
world pain. Thus the thirst for pity is the thirst
for self-gratification, and that, moreover, at the
expense of his fellow-men ; it shows man in the
whole inconsiderateness of his own dear self, but
not exactly in his " stupidity," as La Rochefou-
cauld thinks. In society-talk three-fourths of all
questions asked and of all answers given are
intended to cause the interlocutor a little pain ;
for this reason so many people pine for company ;
it enables them to feel their power. There is a
powerful charm of life in such countless but very
small doses in which malice makes itself felt, just
as goodwill, spread in the same way throughout
the world, is the ever- ready means of healing.
But are there many honest people who will admit
that it is pleasing to give pain ? that one not
infrequently amuses one's self — and amuses one's
self very well — in causing mortifications to others,
at least in thought, and firing off at them the



70 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

grape-shot of petty malice ? Most people are too
dishonest, and a few are too good, to know anything
of this pudendum \ these will always deny that
Prosper Merim^e is right when he says, " Sachez
aussi qu'il rCy a rien de plus commun que de faire
le mal pour le plaisir de le fairer



51.

How Appearance becomes Actuality. —
The actor finally reaches such a point that even in
the deepest sorrow he cannot cease from thinking
about the impression made by his own person and
the general scenic effect ; for instance, even at
the funeral of his child, he will weep over his
own sorrow and its expression like one of his own
audience. The hypocrite, who always plays one
and the same part, ceases at last to be a hypocrite ;
for instance, priests, who as young men are
generally conscious or unconscious hypocrites,
become at last natural, and are then really without
any affectation, just priests ; or if the father does
not succeed so far, perhaps the son does, who
makes use of his father's progress and inherits his
habits. If any one long and obstinately desires to
appear something, he finds it difficult at last to be
anything else. The profession of almost every
individual, even of the artist, begins with hypocrisy,
with an imitating from without, with a copying of
the effective. He who always wears the mask
of a friendly expression must eventually obtain
a power over well-meaning dispositions without
which the expression of friendliness is not to be



I



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 7 1

compelled, — and finally, these, again, obtain a
power over him, he is well-meaning.

52.

The Point of Honour in Deception. —
In all great deceivers one thing is noteworthy, to
which they owe their power. In the actual act of
deception, with all their preparations, the dreadful
voice, expression, and mien, in the midst of their
effective scenery they are overcome by their belief
in themselves ; it is this, then, which speaks so
wonderfully and persuasively to the spectators.
The founders of religions are distinguished from
those great deceivers in that they never awake
from their condition of self-deception ; or at times,
but very rarely, they have an enlightened moment
when doubt overpowers them ; they generally
console themselves, however, by ascribing these
enlightened moments to the influence of the Evil
One. There must be self-deception in order that
this and that vcva-y produce great effects. For men
believe in the truth of everything that is visibly,
strongly believed in.

53.

The Nominal Degrees of Truth. — One
of the commonest mistakes is this : because some
one is truthful and honest towards us, he must
speak the truth. Thus the child believes in its
parents' judgment, the Christian in the assertions
of the Founder of the Church. In the same way
men refuse to admit that all those things which
men defended in former ages with the sacrifice of



72 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

life and happiness were nothing but errors ; it is
even said, perhaps, that they were degrees of the
truth. But what is really meant is that when a
man has honestly believed in something, and has
fought and died for his faith, it would really be
too unjust if he had only been inspired by an
error. Such a thing seems a contradiction of
eternal justice ; therefore the heart of sensitive
man ever enunciates against his head the axiom :
between moral action and intellectual insight there
must absolutely be a necessary connection. It is
unfortunately otherwise ; for there is no eternal
justice.

54.

Falsehood. — Why do people mostly speak
the truth in daily life ? — Assuredly not because a
god has forbidden falsehood. But, firstly, because
it is more convenient, as falsehood requires inven-
tion, deceit, and memory. (As Swift says, he
who tells a lie is not sensible how great a task
he undertakes ; for in order to uphold one
lie he must invent twenty others.) Therefore,
because it is advantageous in upright circum-
stances to say straight out, " I want this, I have
done that," and so on ; because, in other words,
the path of compulsion and authority is surer than
that of cunning. But if a child has been brought
up in complicated domestic circumstances, he em-
ploys falsehood, naturally and unconsciously says
whatever best suits his interests ; a sense of truth
and a hatred of falsehood are quite foreign and
unknown to him, and so he lies in all innocence.



I



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 73



55.

Throwing Suspicion on Morality for
Faith's Sake. — No power can be maintained
when it is only represented by hypocrites ; no
matter how many " worldly " elements the Catholic
Church possesses, its strength lies in those still
numerous priestly natures who render life hard
and full of meaning for themselves, and whose
glance and worn bodies speak of nocturnal vigils,
hunger, burning prayers, and perhaps even of
scourging ; these move men and inspire them
with fear. What if it were necessary to live thus ?
This is the terrible question which their aspect
brings to the lips. Whilst they spread this doubt
they always uprear another pillar of their power ;
even the free-thinker does not dare to withstand
such unselfishness with hard words of truth, and to
say, " Thyself deceived, deceive not others ! " Only
the difference of views divides them from him,
certainly no difference of goodness or badness ;
but men generally treat unjustly that which they
do not like. Thus we speak of the cunning and
the infamous art of the Jesuits, but overlook the
self-control which every individual Jesuit practises,
and the fact that the lightened manner of life
preached by Jesuit books is by no means for their
benefit, but for that of the laity. We may even
ask whether, with precisely similar tactics and
organisation, we enlightened ones would make
equally good tools, equally admirable through
self-conquest, indefatigableness, and renunciation.



74 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

56.

Victory of Knowledge over Radical
Evil. — It is of great advantage to him who de-
sires to be wise to have witnessed for a time the
spectacle of a thoroughly evil and degenerate man ;
it is false, like the contrary spectacle, but for whole
long periods it held the mastery, and its roots have
even extended and ramified themselves to us and
our world. In order to understand ourselves we
must understand it\ but then, in order to mount
higher we must rise above it. We recognise, then,
that there exist no sins in the metaphysical sense ;
but, in the same sense, also no virtues ; we recog-
nise that the entire domain of ethical ideas is
perpetually tottering, that there are higher and
deeper conceptions of good and evil, of moral and
immoral. He who does not desire much more
from things than a knowledge of them easily
makes peace with his soul, and will make a mis-
take (or commit a sin, as the world calls it) at
the most from ignorance, but hardly from covetous-
ness. He will no longer wish to excommunicate
and exterminate desires ; but his only, his wholly
dominating ambition, to know as well as possible
at all times, will make him cool and will soften
all the savageness in his disposition. Moreover,
he has been freed from a number of tormenting
conceptions, he has no more feeling at the mention
of the words " punishments of hell," " sinfulness,"
" incapacity for good," he recognises in them only
the vanishing shadow-pictures of false views of
the world and of life.



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 75



Morality as the Self-Disintegration of
Man. — A good author, who really has his heart in
his work, wishes that some one could come and
annihilate him by representing the same thing in
a clearer way and answering without more ado
the problems therein proposed. The loving girl
wishes she could prove the self-sacrificing faithful-
ness of her love by the unfaithfulness of her
beloved. The soldier hopes to die on the field of
battle for his victorious fatherland ; for his loftiest
desires triumph in the victory of his country.
The mother gives to the child that of which she
deprives herself — sleep, the best food, sometimes
her health and fortune. But are all these un-
egoistic conditions ? Are these deeds of morality
miracles, because, to use Schopenhauer's expres-
sion, they are " impossible and yet performed " ?
Is it not clear that in all four cases the individual
loves something of himself, a thought, a desire, a
production, better than anything else of himself;
that he therefore divides his nature and to one
part sacrifices all the rest? Is it something
entirely different when an obstinate man says, " I
would rather be shot than move a step out of my
way for this man " ? The desire for something
(wish, inclination, longing) is present in all the
instances mentioned ; to give way to it, with all
its consequences, is certainly not " un-egoistic."
— In ethics man does not consider himself as
individuum but as dividuum.



76 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

58.

What One may Promise. — One may promise
actions, but no sentiments, for these are involun-
tary. Whoever promises to love or hate a person,
or be faithful to him for ever, promises something
which is not within his power ; he can certainly
promise such actions as are usually the results of
love, hate, or fidelity, but which may also spring
from other motives ; for many ways and motives
lead to one and the same action. The promise
to love some one for ever is, therefore, really : So
long as I love you I will act towards you in a
loving way ; if I cease to love you, you will still
receive the same treatment from me, although
inspired by other motives, so that our fellow-men
will still be deluded into the belief that our love
is unchanged and ever the same. One promises,
therefore, the continuation of the semblance of
love, when, without self-deception, one speaks vows
of eternal love.

59.

Intellect and Morality. — One must have
a good memory to be able to keep a given promise.
One must have a strong power of imagination to
be able to feel pity. So closely is morality bound
to the goodness of the intellect.

6o.

To wish for Revenge and to take Re-
venge. — To have a revengeful thought and to



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. TJ

carry it into effect is to have a violent attack of
fever, which passes off, however, — but to have a
revengeful thought without the strength and
courage to carry it out is a chronic disease, a
poisoning of body and soul which we have to
bear about with us. Morality, which <jnly takes
intentions into account, considers the two cases
as equal ; usually the former case is regarded as
the worse (because of the evil consequences which
may perhaps result from the deed of revenge).
Both estimates are short-sighted.



6i.

The Power of Waiting. — Waiting is so
difficult that even great poets have not disdained
to take incapability of waiting as the motive for
their works. Thus Shakespeare in Othello or
Sophocles in Ajax, to whom suicide, had he been
able to let his feelings cool down for one day,
would no longer have seemed necessary, as the
oracle intimated ; he would probably have snapped
his fingers at the terrible whisperings of wounded
vanity, and said to himself, " Who has not already,
in my circumstances, mistaken a fool for a hero ?
Is it something so very extraordinary ? " On the
contrary, it is something very commonly human ;
Ajax might allow himself that consolation. Passion
will not wait ; the tragedy in the lives of great men
frequently lies not in their conflict with the times
and the baseness of their fellow-men, but in their
incapacity of postponing their work for a year or
two ; they cannot wait. In all duels advising



78 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

friends have one thing to decide, namely whether
the parties concerned can still wait awhile ; if this
is not the case, then a duel is advisable, inasmuch
as each of the two says, " Either I continue to live
and that other man must die immediately, or vice
versa." In such case waiting would mean a pro-
longed suffering of the terrible martyrdom of
wounded honour in the face of the insulter, and
this may entail more suffering than life is worth.

62.

Revelling in Vengeance. — Coarser individ-
uals who feel themselves insulted, make out the
insult to be as great as possible, and relate the
affair in greatly exaggerated language, in order to
be able to revel thoroughly in the rarely awakened
feelings of hatred and revenge.

63.

The Value of Disparagement. — In order
to maintain their self-respect in their own eyes and
a certain thoroughness of action, not a few men,
perhaps even the majority, find it absolutely
necessary to run down and disparage all their
acquaintances. But as mean natures are numer-
ous, and since it is very important whether they
possess that thoroughness or lose it, hence

64.

The Man in a Passion. — We must beware of
one who is in a passion against us as of one who



i



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 79

has once sought our life ; for the fact that we still
live is due to the absence of power to kill, — if looks
would suffice, we should have been dead long ago.
It is a piece of rough civilisation to force some one
into silence by the exhibition of physical savage-
ness and the inspiring of fear. That cold glance
which exalted persons employ towards their
servants is also a relic of that caste division be-
tween man and man, a piece of rough antiquity ;
women, the preservers of ancient things, have also
faithfully retained this survival of an ancient
habit.

65.

Whither Honesty can Lead. — Somebody
had the bad habit of occasionally talking quite
frankly about the motives of his actions, which
were as good and as bad as the motives of most
men. He first gave offence, then aroused sus-
picion, was then gradually excluded from society
and declared a social outlaw, until at last justice
remembered such an abandoned creature, on
occasions when it would otherwise have had no
eyes, or would have closed them. The lack of
power to hold his tongue concerning the common
secret, and the irresponsible tendency to see what
no one wishes to see — himself — brought him to a
prison and an early death.

66.

Punishable, but never Punished. — Our
crime against criminals lies in the fact that we
treat them like rascals.




8o



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



67.

Sancta simplicitas of Virtue. — Every
virtue has its privileges ; for example, that of
contributing its own little faggot to the scaffold
of every condemned man.



68.

Morality and Consequences. — It is not
only the spectators of a deed who frequently judge
of its morality or immorality according to its
consequences, but the doer of the de^d himselt
does so. For the motives and intentions are
seldom sufficiently clear and simple, and some-
times memory itself seems clouded by the con-
sequences of the deed, so that one ascribes the
deed to false motives or looks upon unessential
motives as essential. Success often gives an
action the whole honest glamour of a good
conscience; failure casts the shadow of re-
morse over the most estimable deed. Hence
arises the well-known practice of the politician,
who thinks, " Only grant me success, with that
I bring all honest souls over to my side and
make myself honest in my own eyes." In
the same way success must replace a better
argument. Many educated people still believe
that the triumph of Christianity over Greek
philosophy is a proof of the greater truthfulness
of the former, — although in this case it is only
the coarser and more powerful that has triumphed
over the more spiritual and delicate. Which pos-



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 8 1

sesses the greater truth may be seen from the fact
that the awakening sciences have agreed with
Epicurus' philosophy on point after point, but on
point after point have rejected Christianity.



69.

Love and Justice. — Why do we over-esti-
mate love to the disadvantage of justice, and say
the most beautiful things about it, as if it were
something very much higher than the latter ? Is
it not visibly more stupid than justice ? Certainly,
but precisely for that reason all the pleas anter for
every one. It is blind, and possesses an abundant
cornucopia, out of which it distributes its gifts to
all, even if they do not deserve them, even if they
express no thanks for them. It is as impartial as
the rain, which, according to the Bible and experi-
ence, makes not only the unjust, but also occasion-
ally the just wet through to the skin.



70.

Execution. — How is it that every execution
offends us more than does a murder ? It is the
coldness of the judges, the painful preparations,
the conviction that a human being is here being
used as a warning to scare others. For the guilt
is not punished, even if it existed — it lies with
educators, parents, surroundinrjs, in ourselves, not
in the murderer — I mean the determining cir-
cumstances.

kVOL. I. F



I



^2



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



71.

Hope. — Pandora brought the box of ills and
opened it. It was the gift of the gods to men,
outwardly a beautiful and seductive gift, and called
the Casket of Happiness. Out of it flew all the
evils, living winged creatures, thence they now
circulate and do men injury day and night. One
single evil had not yet escaped from the box, and
by the will of Zeus Pandora closed the lid and it
remained within. Now for ever man has the
casket of happiness in his house and thinks he
holds a great treasure ; it is at his disposal, he
stretches out his hand for it whenever he desires ;
for he does not know the box which Pandora
brought was the casket of evil, and he believes the
ill which remains within to be the greatest blessing,
— it is hope. Zeus did not wish man, however
much he might be tormented by the other evils,
to fling away his life, but to go on letting himself
be tormented again and again. Therefore he gives
man hope, — in reality it is the worst of all evils,
because it prolongs the torments of man.



72.

The Degree of Moral Inflammability
Unknown. — According to whether we have or
have not had certain disturbing views and im-
pressions — for instance, an unjustly executed,
killed, or martred father ; a faithless wife ; a
cruel hostile attack — it depends whether our
passions reach fever heat and influence our whole



i



THE HISTORY OF THE~MORAL SENTIMENTS. $2,

life or not. No one knows to what he may
be driven by circumstances, pity, or indignation ;
he does not know the degree of his own inflam-
mability. Miserable little circumstances make us
miserable ; it is generally not the quantity of ex-
periences, but their quality, on which lower and
higher man depends, in good and evil.

73-

The Martyr in Spite of Himself. — There
was a man belonging to a party who was too
nervous and cowardly ever to contradict his com-
rades ; they made use of him for everything, they
demanded everything from him, because he was
more afraid of the bad opinion of his companions
than of death itself; his was a miserable, feeble
soul. They recognised this, and on the ground
of these qualities they made a hero of him, and
finally even a martyr. Although the coward in-
wardly always said No, with his lips he always said
Yes, even on the scaffold, when he was about to die
for the opinions of his party ; for beside him stood
one of his old companions, who so tyrannised over
him by word and look that he really suffered death
in the most respectable manner, and has ever
since been celebrated as a martyr and a great
character.

74.

The Every-day Standard. — One will
seldom go wrong if one attributes extreme actions
to vanity, average ones to habit, and petty ones
to fear.



h



84 human, all-too-human.

Misunderstanding Concerning Virtue.
— Whoever has known immorality in connection
with pleasure, as is the case with a man who has
a pleasure-seeking youth behind him, imagines
that virtue must be connected with absence of
pleasure. — Whoever, on the contrary, has been
much plagued by his passions and vices, longs to
find in virtue peace and the soul's happiness.
Hence it is possible for two virtuous persons
not to understand each other at all.

The Ascetic. — The ascetic makes a necessity
of virtue.

17-

Transferring Honour from the Person
TO the Thing. — Deeds of love and sacrifice
for the benefit of one's neighbour are gener-
ally honoured, wherever they are manifested.
Thereby we multiply the valuation of things which
are thus loved, or for which we sacrifice ourselves,
although perhaps they are not worth much in
themselves. A brave army is convinced of the
cause for which it fights.

78.

Ambition a Substitute for the Moral
Sense. — The moral sense must not be lacking in
those natures which have no ambition. The am-



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 85

bitious manage without it, with almost the same
results. For this reason the sons of unpreten-
tious, unambitious families, when once they lose the
moral sense, generally degenerate very quickly
into complete scamps.

79.

Vanity Enriches. — How poor would be the
human mind without vanity ! Thus, however, it
resembles a well-stocked and constantly replen-
ished bazaar which attracts buyers of every kind.
There they can find eilmost everything, obtain
almost everything, provided that they bring the
right sort of coin, namely admiration.



80.

Old Age and Death. — Apart from the com-
mands of religion, the question may well be asked.
Why is it more worthy for an old man who feels
his powers decline, to await his slow exhaustion
and extinction than with full consciousness to set
a limit to his life ? Suicide in this case is a per-
fectly natural, obvious action, which should justly
arouse respect as a triumph of reason, and did
arouse it in those times when the heads of Greek
philosophy and the sturdiest patriots used to seek

I death through suicide. The seeking, on the con-
trary, to prolong existence from day to day, with
anxious consultation of doctors and painful mode
of living, without the power of drawing nearer to
the actual aim of life, is far less worthy. Religion
is rich in excuses to reply to the demand for
I



86 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

suicide, and thus it ingratiates itself with those
who wish to cling to life.



8i.

Errors of the Sufferer and the Doer.
— When a rich man deprives a poor man of a
possession (for instance, a prince taking the sweet-
heart of a plebeian), an error arises in the mind of
the poor man ; he thinks that the rich man must be
utterly infamous to take away from him the little
that he has. But the rich man does not estimate
so highly the value of a single possession, because
he is accustomed to have many ; hence he cannot
imagine himself in the poor man's place, and does
not commit nearly so great a wrong as the latter
supposes. They each have a mistaken idea of the
other. The injustice of the powerful, which, more
than anything else, rouses indignation in history,
is by no means so great as it appears. Alone the
mere inherited consciousness of being a higher
creation, with higher claims, produces a cold tem-
perament, and leaves the conscience quiet ; we
all of us feel no injustice when the difference is
very great between ourselves and another creature,
and kill a fly, for instance, without any pricks of
conscience. Therefore it was no sign of badness
in Xerxes (whom even all Greeks describe as
superlatively noble) when he took a son away
from his father and had him cut in pieces, because
he had expressed a nervous, ominous distrust of
the whole campaign ; in this case the individual
is put out of the way like an unpleasant insect ; he



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. Sy

is too lowly to be allowed any longer to cause
annoyance to a ruler of the world. Yes, every
cruel man is not so cruel as the ill-treated one
imagines ; 4;he idea of pain is not the same as its
endurance. It is the same thing in the case
of unjust judges, of the journalist who leads
public opinion astray by small dishonesties. In
all these cases cause and effect are surrounded by
entirely different groups of feelings and thoughts ;
yet one unconsciously takes it for granted that
doer and sufferer think and feel alike, and accord-
ing to this supposition we measure the guilt of the
one by the pain of the other.

82.

The Skin of the Soul. — As the bones, flesh,
entrails, and blood-vessels are enclosed within a
skin, which makes the aspect of man endurable,
so the emotions and passions of the soul are
enwrapped with vanity, — it is the skin of the soul.

83.

The Sleep of Virtue. — When virtue has
slept, it will arise again all the fresher.

84.

The Refinement of Shame. — People are
not ashamed to think something foul, but they
are ashamed when they think these foul thoughts
are attributed to them



88



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



85.

Malice is Rare. — Most people are far too
much occupied with themselves to be malicious.



86.

The Tongue in the Balance. — We praise
or blame according as the one or the other affords
more opportunity for exhibiting our power of
judgment.



87.

St. Luke xviii. 14, Improved.-
humbleth himself wishes to be exalted.



-He that



88.

The Prevention of Suicide. — There is a
certain right by which we may deprive a man of
life, but none by which we may deprive him of
death ; this is mere cruelty.



89.

Vanity. — We care for the good opinion of
men, firstly because they are useful to us, and
then because we wish to please them (children
their parents, pupils their teachers, and well-
meaning people generally their fellow-men). Only
where the good opinion of men is of importance
to some one, apart from the advantage thereof or
his wish to please, can we speak of vanity. In



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 89

this case the man wishes to please himself, but at
the expense of his fellow-men, either by misleading
them into holding a false opinion about him, or by
aiming at a degree of " good opinion " which must
be painful to every one else (by arousing envy).
The individual usually wishes to corroborate the
opinion he holds of himself by the opinion of others,
and to strengthen it in his own eyes ; but the strong
habit of authority — a habit as old as man himself
— induces many to support by authority their
belief in themselves : that is to say, they accept it
first from others ; they trust the judgment of
others more than their own. The interest in
himself, the wish to please himself, attains to
such a height in a vain man that he misleads
others into having a false, all too elevated estimation
of him, and yet nevertheless sets store by their
authority, — thus causing an error and yet believing
in it. It must be confessed, therefore, that vain
people do not wish to please others so much as
themselves, and that they go so far therein as to
neglect their advantage, for they often endeavour
to prejudice their fellow - men unfavourably,
inimicably, enviously, consequently injuriously
against themselves, merely in order to have
pleasure in themselves, personal pleasure.


90.

The Limits of Human Love. — A man who
as declared that another is an idiot and a bad
companion, is angry when the latter eventually
roves himself to be otherwise.



90 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

91.

MoRAUTi. LARMOYANTE. — What a great deal
of pleasure morality gives ! Only think what a
sea of pleasant tears has been shed over descrip-
tions of noble and unselfish deeds ! This charm
of life would vanish if the belief in absolute
irresponsibility were to obtain supremacy.



92.

The Origin of Justice. — Justice (equity) has
its origin amongst powers which are fairly equal,
as Thucydides (in the terrible dialogue between
the Athenian and Melian ambassadors) rightly
comprehended : that is to say, where there is no
clearly recognisable supremacy, and where a
conflict would be useless and would injure both
sides, there arises the thought of coming to an
understanding and settling the opposing claims ;
the character of exchange is the primary character
of justice. Each party satisfies the other, as each
obtains what he values more than the other.
Each one receives that which he desires, as his
own henceforth, and whatever is desired is received
in return. Justice, therefore, is recompense and
exchange based on the hypothesis of a fairly equal
degree of power, — thus, originally, revenge belongs
to the province of justice, it is an exchange. Also
gratitude. — Justice naturally is based on the point
of view of a judicious self-preservation, on the
egoism, therefore, of that reflection, " Why should
I injure myself uselessly and perhaps not attain



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 9I

my aim after all ? " So much about the origin of
justice. Because man, according to his intellectual
custom, has forgotten the original purpose of so-
called just and reasonable actions, and particularly
because for hundreds of years children have been
taught to admire and imitate such actions, the
idea has gradually arisen that such an action is
un-egoistic ; upon this idea, however, is based the
high estimation in which it is held : which, more-
over, like all valuations, is constantly growing, for
something that is valued highly is striven after,
imitated, multiplied, and increases, because the
value of the output of toil and enthusiasm of each
individual is added to the value of the thing itself.
How little moral would the world look without
this forgetfulness ! A poet might say that God
had placed forgetfulness as door-keeper in the
temple of human dignity.



93.

The Right of the Weaker. — When any
one submits under certain conditions to a greater
power, as a besieged town for instance, the counter-
condition is that one can destroy one's self, burn
the town, and so cause the mighty one a great
loss. Therefore there is a kind of equalisation

I here, on the basis of which rights may be
determined. The enemy has his advantage in
maintaining it. • In so far there are also rights
between slaves and masters, that is, precisely so
far as the possession of the slave is useful and
important to his master. The right originally


HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



extends so far as one appears to be valuable
to the other, essentially unlosable, unconquerable,
and so forth. In so far the weaker one also has
rights, but lesser ones. Hence the famous
unusquisque tantum juris hahet, quantum, potentia
valet (or more exactly, quantum, potentia valere
creditur),

94.

The Three Phases of Hitherto Existing
Morality. — It is the first sign that the animal
has become man when its actions no longer have
regard only to momentary welfare, but to what is
enduring, when it grows useful and practical ; there
the free rule of reason first breaks out. A still
higher step is reached when he acts according to
the principle of honour; by this means he brings
himself into order, submits to common feelings,
and that exalts him still higher over the phase in
which he was led only by the idea of usefulness
from a personal point of view ; he respects and
wishes to be respected, i.e. he understands useful-
ness as dependent upon what he thinks of others
and what others think of him. Eventually he
acts, on the highest step of the hitherto existing
morality, according to his standard of things and
men ; he himself decides for himself and others
what is honourable, what is useful ; he has become
the law-giver of opinions, in accordance with the
ever more highly developed idea of what is useful
and honourable. Knowledge enables him to place
that which is most useful, that is to say the
general, enduring usefulness, above the personal,



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 93

the honourable recognition of general, enduring
validity above the momentary ; he lives and acts
as a collective individual.



95.

The Morality of the Mature Individual.
— The impersonal has hitherto been looked upon
as the actual distinguishing mark of moral action ;
and it has been pointed out that in the beginning
it was in consideration of the common good that
all impersonal actions were praised and distin-
guished. Is not an important change in these
views impending, now when it is more and more
recognised that it is precisely in the most persona/
possible considerations that the common good is
the greatest, so that a strictly personal action now
best illustrates the present idea of morality, as
utility for the mass ? To make a whole person-
ality out of ourselves, and in all that we do to keep
that personality's highest good in view, carries
us further than those sympathetic emotions and
actions for the benefit of others. We all still
suffer, certainly, from the too small consideration
of the personal in us ; it is badly developed, — let
us admit it ; rather has our mind been forcibly
drawn away from it and offered as a sacrifice to
the State, to science, or to those who stand in
need of help, as if it were the bad part which
must be sacrificed. We are still willing to work
for our fellow-men, but only so far as we find our
own greatest advantage in this work, no more and
no less. It is only a question of what we under-



I



94 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

stand as our advantage, the unripe, undeveloped,
crude individual will understand it in the crudest
way.

96.

Custom and Morality. — To be moral,correct,
and virtuous is to be obedient to an old-established
law and custom. Whether we submit with diffi-
culty or willingly is immaterial, enough that we
do so. He is called " good " who, as if naturally,
after long precedent, easily and willingly, there-
fore, does what is right, according to whatever this
may be (as, for instance, taking revenge, if to take
revenge be considered as right, as amongst the
ancient Greeks). He is called good because he
is good " for something " ; but as goodwill, pity,
consideration, moderation, and such like, have come,
with the change in manners, to be looked upon as
" good for something," as useful, the good-natured
and helpful have, later on, come to be distinguished
specially as " good." (In the beginning other and
more important kinds of usefulness stood in the
foreground.) To be evil is to be " not moral "
(immoral), to be immoral is to be in opposi-
tion to tradition, however sensible or stupid it
may be ; injury to the community (the " neigh-
bour" being understood thereby) has, however,
been looked upon by the social laws of all different
ages as being eminently the actual " immorality,"
so that now at the word " evil " we immediately
think of voluntary injury to one's neighbour. The
fundamental antithesis which has taught man the
distinction between moral and immoral, between



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 95

good and evil, is pot the " egoistic " and " un-
egoistic," ..but the being bound to the tradition,
law, and solution thereof. How the tradition has
arisen is immaterial, at all events without regard
to good and evil or any immanent categorical im-
perative, but above all for the purpose of preserving
a community, a generation, an association, a people ;
every superstitious custom that has arisen on
account of some falsely explained accident, creates
a tradition, which it is moral to follow ; to separate
one's self from it is dangerous, but more dangerous
for the community than for the individual (because
the Godhead punishes the community for every
outrage and every violation of its rights, and the
individual only in proportion). Now every tradition
grows continually more venerable, the farther off
lies its origin, the more this is lost sight of; the
veneration paid it accumulates from generation
to generation, the tradition at last becomes holy
and excites awe ; and thus in any case the morality
of piety is a much older morality than that which
requires un-egoistic actions.

97.
Pleasure in Traditional Custom. — An
important species of pleasure, and therewith
the source of morality, arises out of habit.
Man does what is habitual to him more easily,
better, and therefore more willingly; he feels
a pleasure therein, and knows from experience
that the habitual has been tested, and is there-
fore useful ; a custom that we can live with is
proved to be whoesome and advantageous in con-



g6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

trast to all new and not yet tested experiments.
According to this, morality is the union of the
pleasant and the useful ; moreover, it requires no
reflection. As soon as man can use compulsion,
he uses it to introduce and enforce his customs ; for
in his eyes they are proved as the wisdom of life.
In the same way a company of individuals com-
pels each single one to adopt the same customs.
Here the inference is wrong ; because we feel at
ease with a morality, or at least because we are
able to carry on existence with it, therefore this
morality is necessary, for it seems to be the on/)'
possibility of feeling at ease ; the ease of life seems
to grow out of it alone. This comprehension of
the habitual as a necessity of existence is pursued
even to the smallest details of custom, — as insight
into genuine causality is very small with lower
peoples and civilisations, they take precautions
with superstitious fear that everything should go
in its same groove ; even where custom is
difficult, hard, and burdensome, it is preserved
on account of its apparent highest usefulness. It
is not known that the same degree of well-being
can also exist with other customs, and that even
higher degrees may be attained. We become
aware, however, that all customs, even the hardest,
grow pleasanter and milder with time, and that
the severest way of life may become a habit and
therefore a pleasure.

98.

Pleasure and Social Instinct. — Out of
his relations with other men, man obtains a new



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 97

species oi pleasure in addition to those pleasurable
sensations which he derives from himself; whereby
he greatly increases the scope of enjoyment. Per-
haps he has already taken too many of the pleasures
of this sphere from animals, which visibly feel
pleasure when they play with each other, especially
the mother with her young. Then consider the
sexual relations, which make almost every female
interesting to a male with regard to pleasure, and
vice versa. The feeling of pleasure on the basis
of human relations generally makes man better ;
joy in common, pleasure enjoyed together is in-
creased, it gives the individual security, makes him
good-tempered, and dispels mistrust and envy, for
we feel ourselves at ease and see others at ease.
Similar manifestations of pleasure awaken the idea
of the same sensations, the feeling of being like
something ; a like effect is produced by common
sufferings, the same bad weather, dangers, enemies.
Upon this foundation is based the oldest alliance,
the object of which is the mutual obviating and
averting of a threatening danger for the benefit
of each individual. And thus the social instinct
grows out of pleasure.



99

The Innocent Side of so-called Evil
Actions. — All "evil" actions are prompted by
the instinct of preservation, or, more exactly, by
the desire for pleasure and the avoidance of pain
on the part of the individual ; thus prompted, but
not evil. " To cause pain per se " does not exist,

VOL. I. G



98 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

except in the brains of philosophers, neither does
" to give pleasure per se " (pity in Schopenhauer's
meaning). In the social condition before the State
we kill the creature, be it ape or man, who tries
to take from us the fruit of a tree when we are
hungry and approach the tree, as we should still
do with animals in inhospitable countries. The
evil actions which now most rouse our indignation,
are based upon the error that he who causes them
has a free will, that he had the option, therefore,
of not doing us this injury. This belief in option
arouses hatred, desire for revenge, spite, and the
deterioration of the whole imagination, while we
are much less angry with an animal because we
consider it irresponsible. To do injury, not from
the instinct of preservation, but as requital, is the
con.sequence of a false judgment and therefore
equally innocent. The individual can in the con-
dition which lies before the State, act sternly and
cruelly towards other creatures for the purpose of
terrifying, to establish his existence firmly by such
terrifying proofs of his power. -Thus act the
violent, the mighty, the original founders of States,
who subdue the weaker to themselves. They have
the right to do so, such as the State still takes for
itself; or rather, there is no right that can hinder
this. The ground for all morality can only be
made ready when a stronger individual or a
collective individual, for instance society or the
State, subdues the single individuals, .draws them
out of their singleness, and forms them into an
association. . Compulsion precedes morality, indeed
morality itself is compulsion for a time, to



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 99

which one submits for the avoidance of pain.
Later on it becomes . custom, — later still, free
obedience, and finally almost instinct, — then, like
everything long accustomed and natural, it is
connected with pleasure — and is henceforth called
virtue.

ICO.

Shame. — Shame exists everywhere where there
is a " mystery " ; this, however, is a religious
idea, which was widely extended in the older
times of human civilisation. Everywhere were
found bounded domains to which access was for-
bidden by divine right, except under certain con-
ditions ; at first locally, as, for example, certain
spots that ought not to be trodden by the feet
of the uninitiated, in the neighbourhood of
which these latter experienced horror and fear.
This feeling was a good deal carried over into
other relations, for instance, the sex relations,
which, as a privilege and aSvrov of riper years,
had to be withheld from the knowledge of the
young for their advantage, relations for the pro-
tection and sanctification of which many gods
were invented and were set up as guardians in
the nuptial chamber. (In Turkish this room is
on this account called harem, " sanctuary," and is
distinguished with the same name, therefore, that
is used for the entrance courts of the mosques.)
Thus the kingdom is as a centre from which
radiate power and glory, to the subjects a mystery
full of secrecy and shame, of which many after-
effects may still be felt among nations which



100 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

otherwise do not by any means belong to the
bashful type. Similarly, the whole world of inner
conditions, the so-called " soul," is still a mystery
for all who are not philosophers, after it has been
looked upon for endless ages as of divine origin
and as worthy of divine intercourse ; according
to this it is an dBvTov and arouses shame.



lOI.

Judge not. — In considering earlier periods,
care must be taken not to fall into unjust abuse.
The injustice in slavery, the cruelty in the sup-
pression of persons and nations, is not to be
measured by our standard. For the instinct of
justice was not then so far developed. Who
dares to reproach the Genevese Calvin with the
burning of the physician Servet? It was an
action following and resulting from his convictions,
and in the same way the Inquisition had a good
right ; only the ruling views were false, and pro-
duced a result which seems hard to us because
those views have now grown strange to us. Be-
sides, what is the burning of a single individual
compared with eternal pains of hell for almost
all! And yet this idea was universal at that
time, without essentially injuring by its dreadful-
ness the conception of a God. With us, too,
political sectarians are hardly and cruelly treated,
but because one is accustomed to believe in the
necessity of the State, the cruelty is not so deeply
felt here as it is where we repudiate the views.
Cruelty to animals in children and Italians is



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. lOI

due to ignorance, i.e. the animal, through the
interests of Church teaching, has been placed too
far behind man. Much that is dreadful and in-
human in history, much that one hardly likes to
believe, is mitigated by the reflection that the
one who commands and the one who carries out
are different persons, — the former does not be-
hold the right and therefore does not experience
the strong impression on the imagination ; the
latter obeys a superior and therefore feels no
responsibility. Most princes and military heads,
through lack of imagination, easily appear hard
and cruel without really being so. Egoism is
not evily because the idea of the " neighbour " —
the word is of Christian origin and does not
represent the truth — is very weak in us ; and we
feel ourselves almost as free and irresponsible
towards him as towards plants and stones. We
have yet to learn that others suffer, and this can
never be completely learnt.

I02.

" Man always Acts Rightly." — We do not
complain of nature as immoral because it sends
a thunderstorm and makes us wet, — why do
we call those who injure us immoral ? Because
in the latter case we take for granted a free will
functioning voluntarily ; in the former we see
necessity. But this distinction is an error. Thus
we do not call even intentional injury immoral in
all circumstances ; for instance, we kill a fly un-
hesitatingly and intentionally, only because its



102



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



buzzing annoys us ; we punish a criminal
intentionally and hurt him in order to protect
ourselves and society. In the first case it is the
individual who, in order to preserve himself, or
even to protect himself from worry, does inten-
tional injury ; in the second case it is the State.
All morals allow intentional injury in the case of
necessity, that is, when it is a matter of self-pre-
servation ! But these two points of view suffice
to explain all evil actions committed by men
against men, we are desirous of obtaining
pleasure or avoiding pain ; in any case it is
always a question of self-preservation. Socrates
and Plato are right : whatever man does he always
does well, that is, he does that which seems to
him good (useful) according to the degree of his
intellect, the particular standard of his reason-
ableness.

103.

The Harmlessness of Malice. — The aim
of malice is not the suffering of others in itself,
but our own enjoyment ; for instance, as the feeling
of revenge, or stronger nervous excitement. All
teasing, even, shows the pleasure it gives to ex-
ercise our power on others and bring it to an
enjoyable feeling of preponderance. Is it im-
moral to taste pleasure at the expense of another's
pain ? Is malicious joy * devilish, as Schopen-
hauer says ? We give ourselves pleasure in



*This is the untranslatable word Schadenfretide, which
means joy at the rnisfortune of others. — J. M. K.



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. IO3

nature by breaking off twigs, loosening stones,
fighting with wild animals, and do this in order
to become thereby conscious of our strength. Is
the knowledge, therefore, that another suffers
through us, the same thing concerning which we
otherwise feel irresponsible, supposed to make us
immoral ? But if we did not know this we would
not thereby have the enjoyment of our own
superiority, which can only manifest itself by the
suffering of others, for instance in teasing. All
pleasure per se is neither good nor evil ; whence
should come the decision that in order to have
pleasure ourselves we may not cause displeasure
to others ? From the point of view of usefulness
alone, that is, out of consideration for the conse-
quences^ {ox possible displeasure, when the injured
one or the replacing State gives the expectation
of resentment and revenge : this only can have
been the original reason for denying ourselves
such actions. Pity aims just as little at the
pleasure of others as malice at the pain of others
per se. For it contains at least two (perhaps
many more) elements of a personal pleasure, and
is so far self-gratification ; in the first place as the
pleasure of emotion, which is the kind of pity
that exists in tragedy, and then, when it impels
to action, as the pleasure of satisfaction in the
exercise of power. If, besides this, a suffering
person is very dear to us, we lift a sorrow from
ourselves by the exercise of sympathetic actions.
Except by a few philosophers, pity has always
been placed very low in the scale of rnoraj
feelings, and rightly so,



104



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



104.



Self-defence, — If self-defence is allowed to
pass as moral, then almost all manifestations of
the so-called immoral egoism must also stand;
men injure, rob, or kill in order to preserve or
defend themselves, to prevent personal injury ;
they lie where cunning and dissimulation are the
right means of self-preservation. Intentional
injury^ when our existence or safety (preservation
of our comfort) is concerned, is conceded to be
moral ; the State itself injures, according to this
point of view, when it punishes. In unintentional
injury, of course, there can be nothing immoral,
that is ruled by chance. Is there, then, a kind
of intentional injury where our existence or the
preservation of our comfort is not concerned ? Is
there an injuring out of pure malice^ for instance
in cruelty ? If one does not know how much an
action hurts, it is no deed of malice ; thus the
child is not malicious towards the animal, not
evil ; he examines and destroys it like a toy.
But do we ever know entirely how an action hurts
another? As far as our nervous system extends
we protect ourselves from pain ; if it extended
farther, to our fellow-men, namely, we should do
no one an injury (except in such cases as we
injure ourselves, where we cut ourselves for the
sake of cure, tire and exert ourselves for the sake
of health). We conclude by analogy that some-
thing hurts somebody, and through memory and
the strength of imagination we may suffer from it



I



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. I05

ourselves. But still what a difference there is
between toothache and the pain (pity) that the
sight of toothache calls forth ! Therefore, in
injury out of so-called malice the degree of pain
produced is always unknown to us ; but inasmuch
as there is pleasure in the action (the feeling of
one's own power, one's own strong excitement),
the action is committed, in order to preserve the
comfort of the individual, and is regarded, there-
fore, from a similar point of view as defence and
falsehood in necessity. No life without pleasure ;
the struggle for pleasure is the struggle for life.
Whether the individual so fights this fight that
men call him good, or so that they call him evil,
is determined by the measure and the constitution
of his intellect.

105.

Recompensing Justice. — Whoever has com-
pletely comprehended the doctrine of absolute
irresponsibility can no longer include the so-called
punishing and recompensing justice in the idea of
justice, should this consist of giving to each man
his due. For he who is punished does not deserve
the punishment, he is only used as a means of
henceforth warning away from certain actions ;
equally so, he who is rewarded does not merit this
reward, he could not act otherwise than he did.
Therefore the reward is meant only as an
encouragement to him and others, to provide a
motive for subsequent actions ; words of praise
are flung to the runners on the course, not to the



L



io6



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



one who has reached the goal. Neither punish-
ment nor reward is anything that comes to one
as one's own ; they are given from motives of use-
fulness, without one having a right to claim them.
Hence we must say, " The wise man gives no reward
because the deed has been well done," just as we
have said, " The wise man does not punish because
evil has been committed, but in order that evil
shall not be committed." If punishment and
reward no longer existed, then the strongest
motives which deter men from certain actions and
impel them to certain other actions, would also
no longer exist ; the needs of mankind require
their continuance ; and inasmuch as punishment
and reward, blame and praise, work most sensibly
on vanity, the same need requires the continuance
of vanity.

1 06.



At the Waterfall. — In looking at a water-
fall we imagine that there is freedom of will and
fancy in the countless turnings, twistings, and
breakings of the waves ; but everything is com-
pulsory, every movement can be mathematically
calculated. So it is also with human actions ;
one would have to be able to calculate every single
action beforehand if one were all-knowing ; equally
so all progress of knowledge, every error, all malice.
The one who acts certainly labours under the
illusion of voluntariness ; if the world's wheel were
to stand still for a moment and an all-knowing,
calculating reason were there to make use of this



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 107

pause, it could foretell the future of every creature
to the remotest times, and mark out every track
upon which that wheel would continue to roll. The
delusion of the acting agent about himself, the
supposition of a free will, belongs to this mechanism
which still remains to be calculated.



107.

Irresponsibility and Innocence. — The
complete irresponsibility of man for his actions
and his nature is the bitterest drop which he who
understands must swallow if he was accustomed
to see the patent of nobility of his humanity
in responsibility and duty. All his valuations,
distinctions, disinclinations, are thereby deprived
of value and become false, — his deepest feeling
for the sufferer and the hero was based on an
error; he may no longer either praise or blame,
for it is absurd to praise and blame nature and
necessity. In the same way as he loves a fine
work of art, but does not praise it, because it can
do nothing for itself; in the same way as he regards
plants, so must he regard his own actions and
those of mankind. He can admire strength,
beauty, abundance, in themselves ; but must find
no merit therein, — the chemical progress and the
strife of the elements, the torments of the sick
person who thirsts after recovery, are all equally
as little merits as those struggles of the soul and
states of distress in which we are torn hither and
.thither by different impulses until we finally decide



I08 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

for the strongest — as we say (but in reality it is
the strongest motive which decides for us). All
these motives, however, whatever fine names we
may give them, have all grown out of the same
root, in which we believe the evil poisons to be
situated ; between good and evil actions there is
no difference of species, but at most of degree.
Good actions are sublimated evil ones ; evil actions
are vulgarised and stupefied good ones. The
single longing of the individual for self-gratification
(together with the fear of losing it) satisfies itself
in all circumstances : man may act as he can, that
is as he must, be it in deeds of vanity, revenge,
pleasure, usefulness, malice, cunning ; be it in deeds
of sacrifice, of pity, of knowledge. The degrees
of the power of judgment determine whither any
one lets himself be drawn through this longing ;
to every society, to every individual, a scale of
possessions is continually present, according to
which he determines his actions and judges those
of others. But this standard changes constantly ;
many actions are called evil and are only stupid,
because the degree of intelligence which decided
for them was very low. In a certain sense, even,
all actions are still stupid ; for the highest degree
of human intelligence which can now be attained
will assuredly be yet surpassed, and then, in a
retrospect, all our actions and judgments will
appear as limited and hasty as the actions and
judgments of primitive wild peoples now appear
limited and hasty to us. To recognise all this
may be deeply painful, but consolation comes
after ; such pains are the pangs of birth. The



THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS. 109

butterfly wants to break through its chrysalis : it
rends and tears it, and is then blinded and confused
by the unaccustomed light, the kingdom of liberty.
In such people as are capable of such sadness — and
how few are ! — the first experiment made is to see
' whether mankind can change itself from a moral
into a wise mankind. The sun of a new gospel
throws its rays upon the highest point in the soul
of each single individual, then the mists gather
thicker than ever, and the brightest light and
the dreariest shadow lie side by side. Everything
is necessity — so says the new knowledge, and
this knowledge itself is necessity. Everything is
^ innocence, and knowledge is the road to insight
into this innocence. Are pleasure, egoism, vanity
necessary for the production of the moral
phenomena and their highest result, the sense for
truth and justice in knowledge ; were error and
the confusion of the imagination the only means
through which mankind could raise itself gradually
to this degree of self-enlightenment and self-
liberation — who would dare to undervalue these
means? Who would dare to be sad if he
perceived the goal to which those roads led ?
Everything in the domain of morality has evolved,
is changeable, unstable, everything is dissolved, it
is true ; but everything is also streaming towards
te goal. Even if the inherited habit of erroneous
valuation, love and hatred, continue to reign in us,
^et under the influence of growing knowledge it
n\\ become weaker ; a new habit, that of com-
)rehension, of not loving, not hating, of over-
looking, is gradually implanting itself in us upon


HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the same ground, and in thousands of years will
perhaps be powerful enough to give humanity the
strength to produce wise, innocent (consciously
innocent) men, as it now produces unwise, guilt-
conscious men, — that is the necessary preliminary
stepy not its opposite.



THIRD DIVISION.

THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.

The Double Fight against Evil. When

misfortune overtakes us we can either pass over
it so lightly that its cause is removed, or so that
the result which it has on our temperament is
altered, through a changing, therefore, of the evil
into a good, the utility of which is perhaps not
visible until later on. Religion and art (also
metaphysical philosophy) work upon the changing
of the temperament, partly through the changing
of our judgment on events (for instance, with the
help of the phrase "whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth "), partly through the awakening of a
pleasure in pain, in emotion generally (whence
the tragic art takes its starting-point). The more
a man is inclined to twist and arrange meanings
the less he will grasp the causes of evil and dis-
perse them ; the momentary mitigation and in-
fluence of a narcotic, as for example in toothache,
suffices him even in more serious sufferings. The
more the dominion of creeds and all arts dispense
with narcotics, the more strictly men attend to
the actual removing of the evil, which is certainly



t



112 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

bad for writers of tragedy ; for the material for
tragedy is growing scarcer because the domain of
pitiless, inexorable fate is growing ever narrower,
— but worse still for the priests, for they have
hitherto lived on the narcotisation of human
woes.

109.

Sorrow is Knowledge. — How greatly we
should like to exchange the false assertions of the
priests, that there is a god who desires good from
us, a guardian and witness of every action, every
moment, every thought, who loves us and seeks
our welfare in all misfortune, — how greatly we
would like to exchange these ideas for truths
which would be just as healing, pacifying and
beneficial as those errors ! But there are no such
truths ; at most philosophy can oppose to them
metaphysical appearances (at bottom also un-
truths). The tragedy consists in the fact that
we cannot believe those dogmas of religion and
metaphysics, if we have strict methods of truth
in heart and brain : on the other hand, mankind
has, through development, become so delicate,
irritable and suffering, that it has need of
the highest means of healing and consolation ;
whence also the danger arises that man would
bleed to death from recognised truth, or, more
correctly, from discovered error. Byron has
expressed this in the immortal lines : —

Sorrow is knowledge : they who know the most
Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth.
The Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life.



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. II 3

For such troubles there is no better help than to
recall the stately levity of Horace, at least for the
worst hours and eclipses of the soul, and to say
with him :

. . . quid aeternis minorem

consiliis animum fatigas ?
cur non sub alta vel platano vel hac
pinu jacentes.*

But assuredly frivolity or melancholy of every
degree is better than a romantic retrospection
and desertion of the flag, an approach to
Christianity in any form ; for according to the
present condition of knowledge it is absolutely
impossible to approach it without hopelessly
soiling our intellectual conscience and giving our-
selves away to ourselves and others. Those
pains may be unpleasant enough, but we cannot
become leaders and educators of mankind with-
out pain ; and woe to him who would wish
to attempt this and no longer have that clear
conscience !

no.

The Truth in Religion. — In the period
of rationalism justice was not done to the
importance of religion, of that there is no doubt,
but equally there is no doubt that in the reaction
that followed this rationalism justice was far
overstepped ; for religions were treated lovingly,




114 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

even amorously, and, for instance, a deeper, even
the very deepest, understanding of the world was
ascribed to them ; which science has only to strip
of its dogmatic garment in order to possess the
" truth " in un mythical form. Religions should,
therefore, — this was the opinion of all opposers of
rationalism, — sensu allegorico^ with all considera-
tion for the understanding of the masses, give
utterance to that ancient wisdom which is wisdom
itself, inasmuch as all true science of later times
has always led up to it instead of away from it,
so that between the oldest wisdom of mankind
and all later harmonies similarity of discernment
and a progress of knowledge — in case one should
wish to speak of such a thing — rests not upon the
nature but upon the way of communicating it.
This whole conception of religion and science is
thoroughly erroneous, and none would still dare
to profess it if Schopenhauer's eloquence had not
taken it under its protection ; this resonant
eloquence which, however, only reached its hearers
a generation later. As surely as from Schopen-
hauer's religious-moral interpretations of men and
the world much may be gained for the under-
standing of the Christian and other religions, so
surely also is he mistaken about the value of
religion for knowledge. Therein he himself was
only a too docile pupil of the scientific teachers of
his time, who all worshipped romanticism and
had forsworn the spirit of enlightenment ; had he
been born in our present age he could not pos-
sibly have talked about the sensus allegoricus of
religion ; he would much rather have given


THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 15

honour to truth, as he used to do, with the words,
" no religion, direct or indirect, either as dogma or as
allegory, has ever contained a truthy For each
has been born of fear and necessity, through the
byways of reason did it slip into existence ; once,
perhaps, when imperilled by science, some philo-
sophic doctrine has lied itself into its system in
order that it may be found there later, but this
is a theological trick of the time when a religion
already doubts itself. These tricks of theology
(which certainly were practised in the early days
of Christianity, as the religion of a scholarly
period steeped in philosophy) have led to that
superstition of the sensus allegoricus, but yet more
the habits of the philosophers (especially the half-
natures, the poetical philosophers and the philo-
sophising artists), to treat all the sensations which
they discovered in themselves as the fundamental
nature of man in general, and hence to allow their
own religious feelings an important influence in
the building up of their systems. As philosophers
frequently philosophised under the custom of
religious habits, or at least under the anciently
inherited power of that " metaphysical need," they
developed doctrinal opinions which really bore a
great resemblance to the Jewish or Christian or
Indian religious views, — a resemblance, namely,
such as children usually bear to their mothers,
only that in this case the fathers were not clear
about that motherhood, as happens sometimes, —
but in their innocence romanced about a family
likeness between all religion and science. In
reality, between religions and real science there



Il6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

exists neither relationship nor friendship, nor even
enmity; they live on different planets. Every
philosophy which shows a religious comet's tail
shining in the darkness of its last prospects makes
all the science it contains suspicious ; all this
is presumably also religion, even though in the
guise of science. Moreover, if all nations were to
agree about certain religious matters, for instance
the existence of a God (which, it may be remarked,
is not the case with regard to this point), this
would only be an argument against those affirmed
matters, for instance the existence of a God ; the
consensus gentium and hominum in general can
only take place in case of a huge folly. On the
other hand, there is no consensus omnium sapientium,
with regard to any single thing, with that exception
mentioned in Goethe's lines :

" Alle die Weisesten aller der Zeiten
Lacheln und winken und stimmen mit ein :
Thoricht, auf Bess'rung der Thoren zu barren !
Kinder der Klugheit, o habet die Narren
Eben zum Narren auch, wie sich's gehort ! " *

Spoken without verse and rhyme and applied to
our case, the consensus sapientium consists in
this : that the consensus gentium counts as a folly.

* " All greatest sages of all latest ages
Will chuckle and slily agree,
'Tis folly to wait till a fool's empty pate
' Has learnt to be knowing and free :
So children of wisdom, make use of the fools
And use them whenever you can as your tools." — J.M.K



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. II7

III.

The Origin of the Religious Cult. — If
we go back to the times in which the religious life
flourished to the greatest extent, we find a funda-
mental conviction, which we now no longer share,
and whereby the doors leading to a religious life
are closed to us once for all, — it concerns Nature
and intercourse with her. In those times people
knew nothing of natural laws ; neither for earth
nor for heaven is there a " must " ; a season, the
sunshine, the rain may come or may not come.
In short, every idea of natural causality is lacking.
When one rows, it is not the rowing that moves
the boat, but rowing is only a magical ceremony
by which one compels a dcemon to move the
boat. All maladies, even death itself, are the result
of magical influences. Illness and death never
happen naturally ; the whole conception of
" natural sequence " is lacking, — it dawned first
amongst the older Greeks, that is, in a very late
phase of humanity, in the conception of Moira,
enthroned above the gods. When a man shoots
with a bow, there is still always present an
irrational hand and strength ; if the wells suddenly
dry up, men think first of subterranean dcemons
and their tricks ; it must be the arrow of a god
beneath whose invisible blow a man suddenly
sinks down. In India (says Lubbock) a carpenter
is accustomed to offer sacrifice to his hammer, his
hatchet, and the rest of his tools ; in the same way
a Brahmin treats the pen with which he writes, a
soldier the weapons he requires in the field of



Il8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

battle, a mason his trowel, a labourer his plough.
In the imagination of religious people all nature
is a summary of the actions of conscious and
voluntary creatures, an enormous complex of
arbitrariness. No conclusion may be drawn with
regard to everything that is outside of us, that
anything will be so and so, must be so and so ;
the approximately sure, reliable are we, — man is
the rule, nature is irregularity, — this theory con-
tains the fundamental conviction which obtains in
rude, religiously productive primitive civilisations.
We latter-day men feel just the contrary, — the
richer man now feels himself inwardly, the more
polyphonous is the music and the noise of his
soul the more powerfully the symmetry of nature
works upon him ; we all recognise with Goethe
the great means in nature for the appeasing of
the modern soul ; we listen to the pendulum swing
of this greatest of clocks with a longing for rest,
for home and tranquillity, as if we could absorb
this symmetry into ourselves and could only
thereby arrive at the enjoyment of ourselves.
Formerly it was otherwise ; if we consider the
rude, early condition of nations, or contemplate
present-day savages at close quarters, we find
them most strongly influenced by law and by
tradition : the individual is almost automatically
bound to them, and moves with the uniformity of
a pendulum. To him Nature — uncomprehended,
terrible, mysterious Nature — must appear as the
sphere of liberty, of voluntariness, of the higher
power, even as a superhuman degree of existence,
as God. In those times and conditions, however,



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 19

every individual felt that his existence, his happi-
ness, and that of the family and the State, and
the success of all undertakings, depended on those
spontaneities of nature; certain natural events
must appear at the right time, others be absent at
the right time. How can one have any influence
on these terrible unknown things, how can one
bind the sphere of liberty ? Thus he asks himself,
thus he inquires anxiously ; — is there, then, no
means of making those powers as regular through
tradition and law as you are yourself? The aim
of those who believe in magic and miracles is to
impose a law on nature, — and, briefly, the religious
cult is a result of this aim. The problem which
those people have set themselves is closely related
to this : how can the weaker race dictate laws to
the stronger^ rule it, and guide its actions (in
relation to the weaker) ? One would first
remember the most harmless sort of compulsion,
that compulsion which one exercises when one
has gained any one's affection. By imploring and
praying, by submission, by the obligation of regular
taxes and gifts, by flattering glorifications, it is
also possible to exercise an influence upon the
powers of nature, inasmuch as one gains the
affections ; love binds and becomes bound. Then
one can make compacts by which one is mutually
bound to a certain behaviour, where one gives
pledges and exchanges vows. But far more
important is a species of more forcible compulsion,
by magic and witchcraft. As with the sorcerer's
help man is able to injure a more powerful enemy
and keep him in fear, as the love-charm works at



fc



120 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

a distance, so the weaker man believes he can
influence the mightier spirits of nature. The
principal thing in all witchcraft is that we must
get into our possession something that belongs to
some one, hair, nails, food from their table, even
their portrait, their name. With such apparatus
we can then practise sorcery ; for the fundamental
rule is, to everything spiritual there belongs some-
thing corporeal ; with the help of this we are able
to bind the spirit, to injure it, and destroy it ; the
corporeal furnishes the handles with which we can
grasp the spiritual. As man controls man, so he
controls some natural spirit or other ; for this has
also its corporeal part by which it may be grasped.
The tree and, compared with it, the seed from
which it sprang, — this enigmatical contrast seems
to prove that the same spirit embodied itself in
both forms, now small, now large. A stone that
begins to roll suddenly is the body in which a
spirit operates ; if there is an enormous rock
lying on a lonely heath it seems impossible to
conceive human strength sufficient to have brought
it there, consequently the stone must have moved
there by itself, that is, it must be possessed by a
spirit. Everything that has a body is susceptible
to witchcraft, therefore also the natural spirits.
If a god is bound to his image we can
use the most direct compulsion against him
(through refusal of sacrificial food, scourging,
binding in fetters, and so on). In order to
obtain by force the missing favour of their god
the lower classes in China wind cords round the
image of the one who has left them in the lurch,



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 121

pull it down and drag it through the streets in
the dust and the dirt : " You dog of a spirit,"
they say, " we gave you a magnificent temple to
live in, we gilded you prettily, we fed you well,
we offered you sacrifice, and yet you are so
ungrateful." Similar forcible measures against
pictures of the Saints and Virgin when they
refused to do their duty in pestilence or drought,
have been witnessed even during the present
century in Catholic countries. Through all these
magic relations to nature, countless ceremonies
have been called into life ; and at last, when the
confusion has grown too great, an endeavour has
been made to order and systematise them, in
order that the favourable course of the whole
progress of nature, i.e. of the great succession of
the seasons, may seem to be guaranteed by a
corresponding course of a system of procedure.
The essence of the religious cult is to determine
and confine nature to human advantage, to impress
it with a legality, therefore, which it did not
originally possess ; while at the present time we
wish to recognise the legality of nature in order
to adapt ourselves to it. In short, then, the
religious cult is based upon the representations
of sorcery between man and man, — and the
sorcerer is older than the priest. But it is like-

• wise based upon other and nobler representations ;
it premises the sympathetic relation of man to
man, the presence of goodwill, gratitude, the

I hearing of pleaders, of treaties between enemies,
the granting of pledges, and the claim to the
protection of property. In very low stages of



1^2 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

civilisation man does not stand in the relation of
a helpless slave to nature, he is not necessarily its
involuntary bondsman. In the Greek grade of
religion, particularly in relation to the Olympian
gods, there may even be imagined a common life
between two castes, a nobler and more powerful
one, and one less noble ; but in their origin both
belong to each other somehow, and are of one
kind ; they need not be ashamed of each other.
That is the nobility of the Greek religion.

112.

At the Sight of certain Antique
Sacrificial Implements. — The fact of how
many feelings are lost to us may be seen, for
instance, in the mingling of the droll, even of the
obscene, with the religious feeling. The sensation
of the possibility of this mixture vanishes, we only
comprehend historically that it existed in the feasts
of Demeter and Dionysus, in the Christian Easter-
plays and Mysteries. But we also know that
which is noble in alliance with burlesque and such
like, the touching mingled with the laughable,
which perhaps a later age will not be able to
understand.

113.

Christianity as Antiquity. — When on a
Sunday morning we hear the old bells ring out,
we ask ourselves, " Is it possible ! This is done
on account of a Jew crucified two thousand years
ago who said he was the Son of God. The proof
of such an assertion is wanting." Certainly in our



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 23

times the Christian religion is an antiquity that
dates from very early ages, and the fact that its
assertions are still believed, when otherwise all
claims are subjected to such strict examination,
is perhaps the oldest part of this heritage. A
God who creates a son from a mortal woman ; a
sage who requires that man should no longer
work, no longer judge, but should pay attention to
the signs of the approaching end of the world ;
a justice that accepts an innocent being as a
substitute in sacrifice; one who commands his
disciples to drink his blood ; prayers for miraculous
intervention ; sins committed against a God and
atoned for through a God ; the fear of a future
to which death is the portal ; the form of the
cross in an age which no longer knows the
signification and the shame of the cross,* how
terrible all this appears to us, as if risen from the
grave of the ancient past ! Is it credible that
such things are still believed ?



114.

What is un-Greek in Christianity. — The
Greeks did not regard the Homeric gods as raised
above them like masters, nor themselves as being
under them like servants, as the Jews did. They
only saw, as in a mirror, the most perfect examples
of their own caste ; an ideal, therefore, and not an
opposite of their own nature. There is a feeling



* It may be remembered tha^ the cross was the gallows
of the ancient world. — J. M. K.



124 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

of relationship, a mutual interest arises, a kind of
symmachy. Man thinks highly of himself when
he gives himself such gods, and places himself in
a relation like that of the lower nobility towards
the higher; while the Italian nations hold a
genuine peasant-faith, with perpetual fear of evil
and mischievous powers and tormenting spirits.
Wherever the Olympian gods retreated into the
background, Greek life was more sombre and
more anxious. Christianity, on the contrary,
oppressed man and crushed him utterly, sinking
him as if in deep mire ; then into the feeling of
absolute depravity it suddenly threw the light of
divine mercy, so that the surprised man, dazzled
by forgiveness, gave a cry of joy and for a moment
believed that he bore all heaven within himself.
All psychological feelings of Christianity work
upon this unhealthy excess of sentiment, and
upon the deep corruption of head and heart it
necessitates ; it desires to destroy, break, stupefy,
confuse, — only one thing it does not desire, namely
moderation, and therefore it is in the deepest sense
barbaric, Asiatic, ignoble and un- Greek.



115.

To BE Religious with Advantage. — There
are sober and industrious people on whom religion
is embroidered like a hem of higher humanity ;
these do well to remain religious, it beautifies
them. All people who do not understand some
kind of trade in weapons — tongue and pen included
as weapons — become servile ; for such the Christian



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 25

religion is very useful, for then servility assumes
the appearance of Christian virtues and is surpris-
ingly beautified. People to whom their daily life
appears too empty and monotonous easily grow
religious ; this is comprehensible and excusable,
only they have no right to demand religious
sentiments from those whose daily life is not
empty and monotonous.*

116.

The Commonplace Christian. — If Christi-
anity were right, with its theories of an avenging
God, of general sinfulness, of redemption, and the
danger of eternal damnation, it would be a sign of
weak intellect and lack of character not to become
a priest, apostle or hermit, and to work only with
fear and trembling for one's own salvation ; it
would be senseless thus to neglect eternal benefits
for temporary comfort. Taking it for granted
that there is belief, the commonplace Christian is
a miserable figure, a man that really cannot add
two and two together, and who, moreover, just
because of his mental incapacity for responsibility,
did not deserve to be so severely punished as
Christianity has decreed.

117.

Of the Wisdom of Christianity. — It is a
clever stroke on the part of Christianity to teach

* This may give us one of the reasons for the religiosity
still happily prevailing in England and the United States.
—J. M. K.



126 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

the utter unworthiness, sinfulness, and despicable-
ness of mankind so loudly that the disdain of
their fellow-men is no longer possible. " He may
sin as much as he likes, he is not essentially
different from me, — it is I who am unworthy and
despicable in every way," says the Christian to
himself. But even this feeling has lost its sharpest
sting, because the Christian no longer believes in
his individual despicableness ; he is bad as men
are generally, and comforts himself a little with
the axiom, " We are all of one kind."

1 1 8.

Change of Front. — As soon as a religion
triumphs it has for its enemies all those who
would have been its first disciples.

119.

The Fate of Christianity. — Christianity
arose for the purpose of lightening the heart ;
but now it must first make the heart heavy in
order afterwards to lighten it. Consequently it
will perish.

120.

The Proof of Pleasure. — The agreeable
opinion is accepted as true, — this is the proof of
the pleasure (or, as the Church says, the proof of
the strength), of which all religions are so proud
when they ought to be ashamed of it. If Faith
did not make blessed it would not be believed
in ; of how little value must it be, then !



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 12/

121.

A Dangerous Game. — Whoever now allows
scope to his religious feelings must also let them
increase, he cannot do otherwise. His nature
then gradually changes ; it favours whatever is
connected with and near to the religious element,
the whole extent of judgment and feeling becomes
clouded, overcast with religious shadows. Sensa-
tion cannot stand still ; one must therefore take
care.

122.

The Blind Disciples. — So long as one
knows well the strength and weakness of one's
doctrine, one's art, one's religion, its power is
still small. The disciple and apostle who has
no eyes for the weaknesses of the doctrine, the
religion, and so forth, dazzled by the aspect of
the master and by his reverence for him, has on
that account usually more power than the master
himself. Without blind disciples the influence of
a man and his work has never yet become great.
To help a doctrine to victory often means only
so to mix it with stupidity that the weight of the
latter carries off also the victory for the former.



123.

Church Disestablishment. — There is not
enough religion in the world even to destroy
religions.



128



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



124.

The Sinlessness of Man. — If it is under-
stood how " sin came into the world," namely
through errors of reason by which men held each
other, even the single individual held himself, to
be much blacker and much worse than was
actually the case, the whole sensation will be
much lightened, and man and the world will
appear in a blaze of innocence which it will do
one good to contemplate. In the midst of nature
man is always the child per se. This child some-
times has a heavy and terrifying dream, but when
it opens its eyes it always finds itself back again
in Paradise.

125.

The Irreligiousness of Artists. — Homer
is so much at home amongst his gods, and is so
familiar with them as a poet, that he must have
been deeply irreligious ; that which the popular
faith gave him — a meagre, rude, partly terrible
superstition — he treated as freely as the sculptor
does his clay, with the same unconcern, therefore,
which ^schylus and Aristophanes possessed, and
by which in later times the great artists of the
Renaissance distinguished themselves, as also did
Shakespeare and Goethe.



126.

The Art and Power of False Inter-
pretations. — All the visions, terrors, torpors, <



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 29

and ecstasies of saints are well-known forms of
disease, which are only, by reason of deep-rooted
religious and psychological errors, differently
explained by him, namely not as diseases. Thus,
perhaps, the Daimonion of Socrates was only an
affection of the ear, which he, in accordance with
his ruling moral mode of thought, expounded
differently from what would be the case now.
It is the same thing with the madness and
ravings of the prophets and soothsayers ; it is
always the degree of knowledge, fantasy, effort,
morality in the head and heart of the interpreters
which has made so much of it. For the greatest
achievements of the people who are called geniuses
and saints it is necessary that they should secure
interpreters by force, who misunderstand them for
the good of mankind.

127.

The Veneration of Insanity. — Because
it was remarked that excitement frequently made
the mind clearer and produced happy inspirations
it was believed that the happiest inspirations and
WM suggestions were called forth by the greatest
excitement ; and so the insane were revered as
wise and oracular. This is based on a false
conclusion.



128.



li



The Promises of Science. — The aim of
modern science is : as little pain as possible, as
long a life as possible, — a kind of eternal blessed-

■t VOL. I I



I30



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



ness, therefore ; but certainly a very modest one
as compared with the promises of religions.

129.

Forbidden Generosity. — There is not
sufficient love and goodness in the world to permit
us to give some of it away to imaginary beings.



130.

The Continuance of the Religious
Cult in the Feelings. — The Roman Catholic
Church, and before that all antique cults, domin-
ated the entire range of means by which man
was put into unaccustomed moods and rendered
incapable of the cold calculation of judgment or
the clear thinking of reason. A church quivering
with deep tones ; the dull, regular, arresting
appeals of a priestly throng, unconsciously com-
municates its tension to the congregation and
makes it listen almost fearfully, as if a miracle
were in preparation ; the influence of the archi-
tecture, which, as the dwelling of a Godhead,
extends into the uncertain and makes its appari-
tion to be feared in all its sombre spaces, — who
would wish to bring such things back to mankind if
the necessary suppositions are no longer believed ?
But the results of all this are not lost, never-
theless ; the inner world of noble, emotional,'
deeply contrite dispositions, full of presentiments,
blessed with hope, is inborn in mankind mainly
through this cult ; what exists of it now in the





THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 131

soul was then cultivated on a large scale as it
germinated, grew up and blossomed.



131-

The Painful Consequences of Religion.
— However much we may think we have weaned
ourselves from religion, it has nevertheless not
been done so thoroughly as to deprive us of
pleasure in encountering religious sensations and
moods in music, for instance ; and if a philosophy
shows us the justification of metaphysical hopes
and the deep peace of soul to be thence acquired,
and speaks, for instance, of the " whole, certain
gospel in the gaze of Raphael's Madonnas,"
we receive such statements and expositions
particularly warmly ; here the philosopher finds
it easier to prove; that which he desires to
give corresponds to a heart that desires to receive.
Hence it may be observed how the less thoughtful
free spirits really only take offence at the dogmas,
but are well acquainted with the charm of religious
sensations ; they are sorry to lose hold of the
latter for the sake of the former. Scientific
philosophy must be very careful not to smuggle
in errors on the ground of that need, — a need
which has grown up and is consequently
temporary, — even logicians speak of " presenti-
ments " of truth in ethics and in art (for instance,
of the suspicion that " the nature of things is
one "), which should be forbidden to them
Between the carefully established truths and
such " presaged " things there remains the un-



132



HUMAN, ALL-TbO-HUMAN.



bridgable chasm that those are due to intellect
and these to requirement Hunger does not
prove that food exists to satisfy it, but that it
desires food. To " presage " does not mean
the acknowledgment of the existence of a thing
in any one degree, but its possibility, in so far
as it is desired or feared ; " presage " does not
advance one step into the land of certainty. We
believe involuntarily that the portions of a
philosophy which are tinged with religion are
better proved than others ; but actually it is
the contrary, but we have the inward desire that
it may be so, that that which makes blessed,
therefore, may be also the true. This desire
misleads us to accept bad reasons for good ones.



132.

Of the Christian Need of Redemption. —
With careful reflection it must be possible to
obtain an explanation free from mythology of
that process in the soul of a Christian which
is called the need of redemption, consequently
a purely psychological explanation. Up to the
present, the psychological explanations of religious
conditions and processes have certainly been
held in some disrepute, inasmuch as a theology
which called itself free carried on its unprofitable
practice in this domain ; for here from the
beginning (as the mind of its founder, Schleier-
macher, gives us reason to suppose) the preserva-
tion of the Christian religion and the continuance
of Christian theology was kept in view ; a



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 133

theology which was to find a new anchorage
in the psychological analyses of religious " facts,"
and above all a new occupation. Unconcerned
about such predecessors we hazard the following
interpretation of the phenomenon in question.
Man is conscious of certain actions which stand
far down in the customary rank of actions ; he
even discovers in himself a tendency towards
similar actions, a tendency which appears to him
almost as unchangeable as his whole nature.
How willingly would he try himself in that
other species of actions which in the general
valuation are recognised as the loftiest and
highest, how gladly would he feel himself to
be full of the good consciousness which should
follow an unselfish mode of thought ! But
unfortunately he stops short at this wish, and
the discontent at not being able to satisfy it
is added to all the other discontents which his
lot in life or the consequences of those above-
mentioned evil actions have aroused in him ;
so that a deep ill-humour is the result, with the
search for a physician who could remove this
and all its causes. This condition would not
be felt so bitterly if man would only compare
himself frankly with other men, — then he would
have no reason for being dissatisfied with himself
to a particular extent, he would only bear his
share of the common burden of human dis-
satisfaction and imperfection. But he compares
himself with a being who is said to be capable
only of those actions which are called unegoistic,
and to live in the perpetual consciousness of an



134 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

unselfish mode of thought, i.e. with God; it is
because he gazes into this clear mirror that his
image appears to him so dark, so unusually-
warped. Then he is alarmed by the thought
of that same creature, in so far as it floats
before his imagination as a retributive justice ;
in all possible small and great events he thinks
he recognises its anger and menaces, that he
even feels its scourge-strokes as judge and
executioner. Who will help him in this danger,
which, by the prospect of an immeasurable
duration of punishment, exceeds in horror all
the other terrors of the idea ?



133-

Before we examine the further consequences of
this mental state, let us acknowledge that it is
not through his " guilt " and " sin " that man
has got into this condition, but through a series
of errors of reason ; that it was the fault of the
mirror if his image appeared so dark and hateful
to him, and that that mirror was his work, the
very imperfect work of human imagination and
power of judgment. In the first place, a nature
that is only capable of purely unegoistic actions
is more fabulous than the phoenix ; it cannot
even be clearly imagined, just because, when
closely examined, the whole idea " unegoistic
action " vanishes into air. No man ever did
a thing which was done only for others and
without any personal motive; how should he
be able to do anything which had no relation



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 35

to himself, and therefore without inward obligation
(which must always have its foundation in a
personal need) ? How could the ego act without
ego} A God who, on the contrary, is all love,
as such a one is often represented, would not
be capable of a single unegoistic action, whereby
one is reminded of a saying of Lichtenberg's
which is certainly taken from a lower sphere :
"We cannot possibly feel for others, as the
saying is ; we feel only for ourselves. This
sounds hard, but it is not so really if it be
rightly understood. We do not love father or
mother or wife or child, but the pleasant
sensations they cause us ; " or, as Rochefoucauld
says : " Si on croit aimer sa maitresse pour F amour
(telle, on est Hen tromp^." To know the reason
why actions of love are valued more than others,
not on account of their nature, namely, but of
their usefulness, we should compare the examina-
tions already mentioned. On the Origin of
Moral Sentiments. But should a man desire
to be entirely like that God of Love, to do and
wish everything for others and nothing for
himself, the latter is impossible for the reason
that he must do very much for himself to be
able to do something for the love of others.
Then it is taken for granted that the other is
sufficiently egoistic to accept that sacrifice again
and again, that living for him, — so that the people
of love and sacrifice have an interest in the
continuance of those who are loveless and
incapable of sacrifice, and, in order to exist,
the highest morality would be obliged positively



136



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



to compel the existence of un-morality (whereby
it would certainly annihilate itself). Further :
the conception of a God disturbs and humbles
so long as it is believed in ; but as to how it
arose there can no longer be any doubt in the
present state of the science of comparative
ethnology ; and with a comprehension of this
origin all belief falls to the ground. The
Christian who compares his nature with God's
is like Don Quixote, who under-valued his own
bravery because his head was full of the
marvellous deeds of the heroes of the chivalric
romances, — -the standard of measurement in both
cases belongs to the domain of fable. But if the
idea of God is removed, so is also the feeling
of " sin " as a trespass against divine laws, as
a stain in a creature vowed to God. Then,
perhaps, there still remains that dejection which
is intergrown and connected with the fear of
the punishment of worldly justice or of the
scorn of men ; the dejection of the pricks of
conscience, the sharpest thorn in the conscious-
ness of sin, is always removed if we recognise
that though by our own deed we have sinned
against human descent, human laws and
ordinances, still that we have not imperilled the
" eternal salvation of the Soul " and its relation
to the Godhead. And if man succeeds in
gaining philosophic conviction of the absolute
necessity of all actions and their entire irresponsi-
bility, and absorbing this into his flesh and blood,
even those remains of the pricks of conscience
vanish.



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 37



134.

Now if the Christian, as we have said, has fallen
into the way of self-contempt in consequence of
certain errors through a false, unscientific inter-
pretation of his actions and sensations, he must
notice with great surprise how that state of con-
tempt, the pricks of conscience and displeasure
generally, does not endure, how sometimes there
come hours when all this is wafted away from
his soul and he feels himself once more free and
courageous. In truth, the pleasure in himself,
the comfort of his own strength, together with
the necessary weakening through time of every
deep emotion, has usually been victorious ; man
loves himself once again, he feels it, — but precisely
this new love, this self-esteem, seems to him
incredible, he can only see in it the wholly un-
deserved descent of a stream of mercy from on high.
If he formerly believed that in every event he
could recognise warnings, menaces, punishments,
and every kind of manifestation of divine anger,
he now finds divine goodness in all his experiences,
— this event appears to him to be full of love, that
one a helpful hint, a third, and, indeed, his whole
happy mood, a proof that God is merciful. As
formerly, in his state of pain, he interpreted his
actions falsely, so now he misinterprets his ex-
periences ; his mood of comfort he believes to be
the working of a power operating outside of him-
self, the love with which he really loves himself
seems to him to be divine love; that which he



138



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



calls mercy, and the prologue to redemption, is
actually self-forgiveness, self-redemption.



^35.

Therefore: A certain false psychology, a
certain kind of imaginative interpretation of
motives and experiences, is the necessary pre-
liminary for one to become a Christian and to
feel the need of redemption. When this error
of reason and imagination is recognised, one ceases,
to be a Christian.

136.

Of Christian Asceticism and Holiness.
— As greatly as isolated thinkers have endeavoured
to depict as a miracle the rare manifestations of
morality, which are generally called asceticism and
holiness, miracles which it would be almost an out-
rage and sacrilege to explain by the light of common
sense, as strong also is the inclination towards this
outrage. A mighty impulse of nature has at all
times led to a protest against those manifestations ;
science, in so far as it is an imitation of nature, at
least allows itself to rise against the supposed in-
explicableness and unapproachableness of these
objections. So far it has certainly not succeeded :
those appearances are still unexplained, to the
great joy of the above-mentioned worshippers of
the morally marvellous. For, speaking generally,
the unexplained fnust be absolutely inexplicable,
the inexplicable absolutely unnatural, supernatural,
wonderful, — thus runs the demand in the souls of






THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 39



h



religious and metaphysical people (also of
artists, if they should happen to be thinkers at the
same time ) ; whilst the scientist sees in this de-
mand the " evil principle " in itself. The general,
first probability upon which one lights in the
contemplation of holiness and asceticism is this,
that their nature is a complicated one, for almost
everywhere, within the physical world as well as
in the moral, the apparently marvellous has been
successfully traced back to the complicated, the
many-conditioned. Let us venture, therefore, to
isolate separate impulses from the soul of saints
and ascetics, and finally to imagine them as inter-
grown.

137.

There is a defiance of self, to the sublimest
manifestation of which belong many forms of
asceticism. Certain individuals have such great
need of exercising their power and love of ruling
that, in default of other objects, or because they
have never succeeded otherwise, they finally ex-
cogitate the idea of tyrannising over certain parts of
their own nature, portions or degrees of themselves.
Thus many a thinker confesses to views which
evidently do not serve either to increase or im-
prove his reputation ; many a one deliberately
calls down the scorn of others when by keeping
silence he could easily have remained respected ;
others contradict former opinions and do not
hesitate to be called inconsistent — on the contrary,
they strive after this, and behave like reckless



140



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



riders who like a horse best when it has grown
wild, unmanageable, and covered with sweat.
Thus man climbs dangerous paths up the highest
mountains in order that he may laugh to scorn
his own fear and his trembling knees ; thus the
philosopher owns to views on asceticism, humility,
holiness, in the brightness of which his own
picture shows to the worst possible disadvantage.
This crushing of one's self, this scorn of one's own
nature, this spernere se sperni, of which religion
has made so much, is really a very high degree of
vanity. The whole moral of the Sermon on the
Mount belongs here ; man takes a genuine delight
in doing violence to himself by these exaggerated
claims, and afterwards idolising these tyrannical
demands of his soul. In every ascetic morality
man worships one part of himself as a God, and
is obliged, therefore, to diabolise the other parts.



138.

Man is not equally moral at all hours, this is
well known. If his morality is judged to be the
capability for great self-sacrificing resolutions and
self-denial (which, when continuous and grown
habitual, are called holiness), he is most moral in
the passions ; the higher emotion provides him
with entirely new motives, of which he, sober and
cold as usual, perhaps does not even believe him-
self capable. How does this happen ? Probably
because of the proximity of everything great
and highly exciting; if man is once wrought up



I



II



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 141

to a state of extraordinary suspense, he is as
capable of carrying out a terrible revenge as of
a terrible crushing of his need for revenge. Under
the influence of powerful emotion, he desires in
any case the great, the powerful, the immense ; and
if he happens to notice that the sacrifice of himself
satisfies him as well as, or better than, the sacrifice
of others, he chooses that. Actually, therefore,
he only cares about discharging his emotion ; in
order to ease his tension he seizes the enemy's
spears and buries them in his breast. That there
was something great in self-denial and not in
revenge had to be taught to mankind by long
habit ; a Godhead that sacrificed itself was the
strongest, most effective symbol of this kind of
greatness. As the conquest of the most diflScult
enemy, the sudden mastering of an affection —
thus this denial appears \ and so far it passes for
the summit of morality. In reality it is a question
of the confusion of one idea with another, while
the temperament maintains an equal height, an
equal level. Temperate men who are resting from
their passions no longer understand the morality
of those moments ; but the general admiration of
those who had the same experiences upholds them ;
pride is their consolation when affection and the
understanding of their deed vanish. Therefore,
at bottom even those actions of self-denial are not
moral, inasmuch as they are not done strictly
with regard to others ; rather the other only pro-
vides the highly-strung temperament with an
opportunity of relieving itself through that
denial.



142 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

139.

In many respects the ascetic seeks to make life
easy for himself, usually by complete subordination
to a strange will or a comprehensive law and
ritual ; something like the way a Brahmin leaves
nothing whatever to his own decision but refers
every moment to holy precepts. This submission
is a powerful means of attaining self-mastery :
man is occupied and is therefore not bored, and
yet has no incitement to self-will or passion ; after a
completed deed there is no feeling of responsibility
and with it no tortures of remorse. We have
renounced our own will once and for ever, and
this is easier than only renouncing it occasionally ;
as it is also easier to give up a desire entirely than
to keep it within bounds. When we remember
the present relation of man to the State, we find
that, even here, unconditional obedience is more
convenient than conditional. The saint, therefore,
makes his life easier by absolute renunciation of
his personality, and we are mistaken if in that
phenomenon we admire the loftiest heroism of
morality. In any case it is more difficult to carry
one's personality through without vacillation and
unclearness than to liberate one's self from it in
the above-mentioned manner ; moreover, it requires
far more spirit and consideration.



140.

After having found in many of the less easily
explicable actions manifestations of that pleasure



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. I43

in emotion per se, I should like to recognise also in
self-contempt, which is one of the signs of holiness,
and likewise in the deeds of self-torture (through
hunger and scourging, mutilation of limbs, feigning
of madness) a means by which those natures fight
against the general weariness of their life-will
(their nerves) ; they employ the most painful
irritants and cruelties in order to emerge for a
time, at all events, from that dulness and boredom
into which they so frequently sink through their
great mental indolence and that submission to a
strange will already described.



141.

The commonest means which the ascetic and
saint employs to render life still endurable and
amusing consists in occasional warfare with
alternate victory and defeat. For this he requires
an opponent, and finds it in the so-called " inward
enemy." He principally makes use of his inclina-
tion to vanity, love of honour and rule, and of his
sensual desires, that he may be permitted to regard
his life as a perpetual battle and himself as a battle-
field upon which good and evil spirits strive with
alternating success. It is well known that sensual
imagination is moderated, indeed almost dispelled,
by regular sexual intercourse, whereas, on the
contrary, it is rendered unfettered and wild by
abstinence or irregularity. The imagination of
many Christian saints was filthy to an extra-
ordinary degree ; by virtue of those theories that
these desires were actual demons raging within



144 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

them they did not feel themselves to be too
responsible ; to this feeling we owe the very
instructive frankness of their self-confessions. It
was to their interest that this strife should always
be maintained in one degree or another, because,
as we have already said, their empty life was thereby
entertained. But in order that the strife might
seem sufficiently important and arouse the enduring
sympathy and admiration of non-saints, it was
necessary that sensuality should be ever more
reviled and branded, the danger of eternal
damnation was so tightly bound up with these
things that it is highly probable that for whole
centuries Christians generated children with a
bad conscience, wherewith humanity has certainly
suffered a great injury. And yet here truth is
all topsy-turvy, which is particularly unsuitable
for truth. Certainly Christianity had said that
every man is conceived and born in sin, and
in the insupportable superlative-Christianity of
Calderon this thought again appears, tied up and
twisted, as the most distorted paradox there is, in
the well-known lines —

" The greatest sin of man
Is that he was ever born."

In all pessimistic religions the act of generation
was looked upon as evil in itself. This is by no
means the verdict of all mankind, not even of
all pessimists. For instance, Empedocles saw in
all erotic things nothing shameful, diabolical, or,
sinful ; but rather, in the great plain of disaster
he saw only one hopeful and redeeming figure, that



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. I45

of Aphrodite ; she appeared to him as a guarantee
that the strife should not endure eternally, but
that the sceptre should one day be given over to
a gentler dcsinon. The actual Christian pessimists
had, as has been said, an interest in the dominance
of a diverse opinion ; for the solitude and spiritual
wilderness of their lives they required an ever
living enemy, and a generally recognised enemy,
through whose fighting and overcoming they could
constantly represent themselves to the non-saints
as incomprehensible, half - supernatural beings.
But when at last this enemy took to flight for ever
in consequence of their mode of life and their
impaired health, they immediately understood how
to populate their interior with new daemons.
The rising and falling of the scales of pride and
humility sustained their brooding minds as well
as the alternations of desire and peace of soul.
At that time psychology served not only to cast
suspicion upon everything human, but to oppress,
to scourge, to crucify ; people wished to find
themselves as bad and wicked as possible, they
sought anxiety for the salvation of their souls,
despair of their own strength. Everything natural
with which man has connected the idea of evil and
sin (as, for instance, he is still accustomed to do
with regard to the erotic) troubles and clouds the
imagination, causes a frightened glance, makes
man quarrel with himself and uncertain and dis-
trustful of himself. Even his dreams have the
flavour of a restless conscience. And yet in the
reality of things this suffering from what is natural
is entirely without foundation, it is only the

VOL. I. K



li.



146 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

consequence of opinions about things. It is easily
seen how men grow worse by considering the
inevitably-natural as bad, and afterwards always
feeling themselves made thus. It is the trump-
card of religion and metaphysics, which wish to
have man evil and sinful by nature, to cast sus-
picion on nature and thus really to make him bad,
for he learns to feel himself evil since he cannot
divest himself of the clothing of nature. After
living for long a natural life, he gradually comes
to feel himself weighed down by such a burden
of sin that supernatural powers are necessary to
lift this burden, and therewith arises the so-called
need of redemption, which corresponds to no real
but only to an imaginary sinfulness. If we survey
the separate moral demands of the earliest times
of Christianity it will everywhere be found that
requirements are exaggerated in order that man
cannot satisfy them ; the intention is not that he
should become more moral, but that he should
feel himself as sinful as possible. If man had not
found this feeling agreeable — why would he have
thought out such an idea and stuck to it so long?
As in the antique world an immeasurable power
of intellect and inventiveness was expended in
multiplying the pleasure of life by festive cults, so
also in the age of Christianity an immeasurable
amount of intellect has been sacrificed to another
endeavour, — man must by all means be made
to feel himself sinful and thereby be excited,
enlivened, ensouled. To excite, enliven, en-soul
at all costs — is not that the watchword of a
relaxed, over-ripe, over-cultured age ? The range



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 147

of all natural sensations had been gone over a
hundred times, the soul had grown weary, where-
upon the saint and the ascetic invented a new
species of stimulants for life. They presented
themselves before the public eye, not exactly as an
example for the many, but as a terrible and yet
ravishing spectacle, which took place on that
border-land between world and over-world, wherein
at that time all people believed they saw now
rays of heavenly light and now unholy tongues of
flame glowing in the depths. The saint's eye, fixed
upon the terrible meaning of this short earthly life,
upon the nearness of the last decision concerning
endless new spans of existence, this burning eye
in a half-wasted body made men of the old world
tremble to their very depths; to gaze, to turn
shudderingly away, to feel anew the attraction of
the spectacle and to give way to it, to drink deep
of it till the soul quivered with fire and ague, —
that was the last pleasure that antiquity invented
after it had grown blunted even at the sight of
beast-baitings and human combats.



ip



142.



L



Now to sum up. That condition of soul in
which the saint or embryo saint rejoiced, was
composed of elements which we all know well,
only that under the influence of other than
religious conceptions they exhibit themselves in
other colours and are then accustomed to en-
counter man's blame as fully as, with that
decoration of religion and the ultimate meaning



148 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

of existence, they may reckon on receiving ad-
miration and even worship, — might reckon, at
least, in former ages. Sometimes the saint
practises that defiance of himself which is a
near relative of domination at any cost and
gives a feeling of power even to the most
lonely ; sometimes his swollen sensibility leaps
from the desire to let his passions have full
play into the desire to overthrow them like
wild horses under the mighty pressure of a
proud spirit ; sometimes he desires a complete
cessation of all disturbing, tormenting, irritating
sensations, a waking sleep, a lasting rest in the
lap of a dull, animal, and plant-like indolence ;
sometimes he seeks strife and arouses it within
himself, because boredom has shown him its
yawning countenance. He scourges his self-
adoration with self-contempt and cruelty, he
rejoices in the wild tumult of his desires and
the sharp pain of sin, even in the idea of being
lost ; he understands how to lay a trap for his
emotions, for instance even for his keen love of
ruling, so that he sinks into the most utter
abasement and his tormented soul is thrown out
of joint by this contrast ; and finally, if he longs
for visions, conversations with the dead or with
divine beings, it is at bottom a rare kind of de-
light that he covets, pernaps that delight in which
all others are united. Novalis, an authority on
questions of holiness through experience and
instinct, tells the whole secret with naive joy:
" It is strange enough that the association of
lust, religion, and cruelty did not long ago



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1 49

draw men's attention to their close relationship
and common tendency."



143.

That which gives the saint his historical value
is not the thing he is, but the thing he represents
in the eyes of the unsaintly. It was through the
fact that errors were made about him, that the
state of his soul vfdiS falsely interpreted, that men
separated themselves from him as much as
possible, as from something incomparable and
strangely superhuman, that he acquired the
extraordinary power which he exercised over
the imagination of whole nations and whole ages.
He did not know himself; he himself interpreted
the writing of his moods, inclinations, and actions
according to an art of interpretation which was
as exaggerated and artificial as the spiritual inter-
pretation of the Bible. The distorted and diseased
in his nature, with its combination of intellectual
poverty, evil knowledge, ruined health, and over-
excited nerves, remained hidden from his own
sight as well as from that of his spectators. He
was not a particularly good man, and still less
was he a particularly wise one ; but he represented
something that exceeded the human standard in
goodness and wisdom. The belief in him sup-
ported the belief in the divine and miraculous,
in a religious meaning of all existence, in an
impending day of judgment. In the evening
glory of the world's sunset, which glowed over



L



150 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

the Christian nations, the shadowy form of the
saint grew to vast dimensions, it grew to such
a height that even in our own age, which no
longer believes in God, there are still thinkers
who believe in the saint.



144.

It need not be said that to this description of
the saint which has been made from an average
of the whole species, there may be opposed many
a description which could give a more agreeable
impression. Certain exceptions stand out from
among this species, it may be through great
mildness and philanthropy, it may be through
the magic of unusual energy ; others are attrac-
tive in the highest degree, because certain wild
ravings have poured streams of light on their whole
being, as is the case, for instance, with the famous
founder of Christianity, who thought he was the
Son of God and therefore felt himself sinless — so
that through this idea — which we must not judge
too hardly because the whole antique world
swarms with sons of God — he reached that same
goal, that feeling of complete sinlessness, com-
plete irresponsibility, which every one can now
acquire by means of science. Neither have I
mentioned the Indian saints, who stand midway
between the Christian saint and the Greek
philosopher, and in so far represent no pure
type. Knowledge, science — such as existed then
— the uplifting above other men through logical



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 15 1

f discipline and training of thought, were as much
fostered by the Buddhists as distinguishing signs
of holiness as the same qualities in the Christian
world are repressed and branded as signs of
unholiness.



FOURTH DIVISION.

CONCERNING THE SOUL OF ARTISTS
AND AUTHORS.

145.
The Perfect should not have Grown. —
With regard to everything that is perfect we
are accustomed to omit the question as to how
perfection has been acquired, and we only rejoice
in the present as if it had sprung out of the
ground by magic. Probably with regard to this
matter we are still under the effects of an ancient
mythological feeling. It still almost seems to
us (in such a Greek temple, for instance, as that
of Paestum) as if one morning a god in sport
had built his dwelling of such enormous masses,
at other times it seems as if his spirit had
suddenly entered into a stone and now desired
to speak through it. The artist knows that his
work is only fully effective if it arouses the
belief in an improvisation, in a marvellous
instantaneousness of origin ; and thus he assists
this illusion and introduces into art those elements
of inspired unrest, of blindly groping disorder, of
listening dreaming at the beginning of creation,
as a means of deception, in order so to influence
the soul of the spectator or hearer that it may



154 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

believe in the sudden appearance of the perfect.
It is the business of the science of art to con-
tradict this illusion most decidedly, and to show up
the mistakes and pampering of the intellect, by
means of which it falls into the artist's trap.



146.

The Artist's Sense of Truth. — With
regard to recognition of truths, the artist has
a weaker morality than the thinker; he will
on no account let himself be deprived of brilliant
and profound interpretations of life, and defends
himself against temperate and simple methods
and results. He is apparently fighting for the
higher worthiness and meaning of mankind ;
in reality he will not renounce the most effective
suppositions for his art, the fantastical, mythical,
uncertain, extreme, the sense of the symbolical,
the over-valuation of personality, the belief that
genius is something miraculous, — he considers,
therefore, the continuance of his art of creation
as more important than the scientific devotion
to truth in every shape, however simple this
may appear.

147.

Art as Raiser of the Dead. — Art also
fulfils the task of preservation and even of
brightening up extinguished and faded memories ;
when it accomplishes this task it weaves a rope
round the ages and causes their spirits to return.
It is, certainly, only a phantom-life that results



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS, 1 55

therefrom, as out of graves, or like the return
in dreams of our beloved dead, but for some
moments, at least, the old sensation lives again
and the heart beats to an almost forgotten time.
Hence, for the sake of the general usefulness
of art, the artist himself must be excused if he
does not stand in the front rank of the enlighten-
ment and progressive civilisation of humanity;
all his life long he has remained a child or a
youth, and has stood still at the point where he
was overcome by his artistic impulse ; the feelings
of the first years of life, however, are ac-
knowledged to be nearer to those of earlier
times than to those of the present century.
Unconsciously it becomes his mission to make
mankind more childlike; this is his glory and
his limitation.

148,

Poets as the Lighteners of Life, —
Poets, inasmuch as they desire to lighten the
life of man, either divert his gaze from the
wearisome present, or assist the present to
acquire new colours by means of a life which
they cause to shine out of the past. To be
able to do this, they must in many respects
themselves be beings who are turned towards
the past, so that they can be used as bridges
to far distant times and ideas, to dying or dead
religions and cultures. Actually they are always
and of necessity epigoni. There are, however,
certain drawbacks to their means of lightening
Hie, — they appease and heal only temporarily,



156 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

only for the moment ; they even prevent men
from labouring towards a genuine improvement
in their conditions, inasmuch as they remove
and apply palliatives to precisely that passion
of discontent that induces to action.



149.

The Slow Arrow of Beauty. — The noblest
kind of beauty is that which does not transport
us suddenly, which does not make stormy and
intoxicating impressions (such a kind easily
arouses disgust), but that which slowly filters
into our minds, which we take away with us
almost unnoticed, and which we encounter again
in our dreams ; but which, however, after having
long lain modestly on our hearts, takes entire
possession of us, fills our eyes with tears and
our hearts with longing. What is it that we
long for at the sight of beauty? We long to
be beautiful, we fancy it must bring much
happiness with it. But that is a mistake.

150.

The Animation of Art. — Art raises its head
where creeds relax. It takes over many feelings
and moods engendered by religion, lays them to
its heart, and itself becomes deeper, more full
of soul, so that it is capable of transmitting
exultation and enthusiasm, which it previously
was not able to do. The abundance of religious
feelings which have grown into a stream are



11



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 57

always breaking forth again and desire to
conquer new kingdoms, but the growing enlighten-
ment has shaken the dogmas of religion and
inspired a deep mistrust, — thus the feeling, thrust
by enlightenment out of the religious sphere,
throws itself upon art, in a few cases into political
life, even straight into science. Everywhere where
human endeavour wears a loftier, gloomier aspect,
it may be assumed that the fear of spirits, incense,
and church-shadows have remained attached to it.



151.

How Rhythm Beautifies. — Rhythm casts
a veil over reality ; it causes various artificialities
of speech and obscurities of thought ; by the
shadow it throws upon thought it sometimes
conceals it, and sometimes brings it into
prominence. As shadow is necessary to beauty,
so the " dull " is necessary to lucidity. Art
makes the aspect of life endurable by throwing
over it the veil of obscure thought.

152.

The Art of the Ugly Soul. — Art is
confined within too narrow limits if it be required
that only the orderly, respectable, well-behaved
soul should be allowed to express itself therein.
As in the plastic arts, so also in music and
poetry : there is an art of the ugly soul side
by side with the art of the beautiful soul ; and
I' the mightiest effects of art, the crushing of souls,

k



158



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



moving of stones and humanising of beasts, have
perhaps been best achieved precisely by that art.



153.

Art makes Heavy the Heart of the
Thinker. — How strong metaphysical need is
and how difficult nature renders our departure
from it may be seen from the fact that even in
the free spirit, when he has cast off everything
metaphysical, the loftiest effects of art can easily
produce a resounding of the long silent, even
broken, metaphysical string, — it may be, for
instance, that at a passage in Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony he feels himself floating above the
earth in a starry dome with the dream of immor-
tality in his heart ; all the stars seem to shine
round him, and the earth to sink farther and
farther away. — If he becomes conscious of this
state, he feels a deep pain at his heart, and sighs
for the man who will lead back to him his lost
darling, be it called religion or metaphysics. In
such moments his intellectual character is put to
the test.

154.

Playing with Life. — The lightness and
frivolity of the Homeric imagination was necessary
, to calm and occasionally to raise the immoderately
/ passionate temperament and acute intellect of the
I Greeks. If their intellect speaks, how harsh and
I cruel does life then appear ! They do not deceive
I themselves, but they intentionally weave lies round



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 59

life. Simonides advised his countrymen to look
upon life as a game ; earnestness was too well-
known to them as pain (the gods so gladly hear
the misery of mankind made the theme of song),
and they knew that through art alone misery
might be turned into pleasure. As a punishment
for this insight, however, they were so plagued
with the love of romancing that it was difficult
for them in everyday life to keep themselves free
from falsehood and deceit ; for all poetic nations
have such a love of falsehood, and yet are innocent
withal. Probably this occasionally drove the neigh-
bouring nations to desperation.

155-

The Belief in Inspiration. — It is to the
interest of the artist that there should be a belief
in sudden suggestions, so-called inspirations ; as
if the idea of a work of art, of poetry, the funda-
mental thought of a philosophy shone down from
heaven like a ray of grace. In reality the imagina-
tion of the good artist or thinker constantly pro-
duces good, mediocre, and bad, but his judgment,
most clear and practised, rejects and chooses
and joins together, just as we now learn from
Beethoven's notebooks that he gradually com-
posed the most beautiful melodies, and in a
manner selected them, from many different
attempts. He who makes less severe distinctions,
and willingly abandons himself to imitative
memories, may under certain circumstances be-
come a great improvisatore ; but artistic impro-



i6o



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



visation ranks low in comparison with serious and
laboriously chosen artistic thoughts. All great
men were great workers, unwearied not only in
invention but also in rejection, reviewing, trans-
forming, and arranging.



156.

Inspiration Again. — If the productive power
has been suspended for a length of time, and has
been hindered in its outflow by some obstacle,
there comes at last such a sudden out-pouring, as
if an immediate inspiration were taking place
without previous inward working, consequently a
miracle. This constitutes the familiar deception,
in the continuance of which, as we have said, the
interest of all artists is rather too much concerned.
The capital has only accumulated^ it has not
suddenly fallen down from heaven. Moreover,
such apparent inspirations are seen elsewhere, for
instance in the realm of goodness, of virtue and
of vice.

157.

The Suffering of Genius and its Value.
— The artistic genius desires to give pleasure, but
if his mind is on a very high plane he does not easily
find any one to share his pleasure ; he offers en-
tertainment but nobody accepts it. This gives
him, in certain circumstances, a comically touching
pathos ; for he has really no right to force pleasure
on men. He pipes, but none will dance : can that
be tragic ? Perhaps. — As compensation for this
deprivation, however, he finds more pleasure in



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. l6l

creating than the rest of mankind experiences in
all other species of activity. His sufferings are con-
sidered as exaggerated, because the sound of his
complaints is louder and his tongue more eloquent ;
and yet sometimes his sufferings are really very
great ; but only because his ambition and his envy
are so great. The learned genius, like Kepler
and Spinoza, is usually not so covetous and does
not make such an exhibition of his really greater
sufferings and deprivations. He can reckon with
greater certainty on future fame and can afford to
do without the present, whilst an artist who does
this always plays a desperate game that makes
his heart ache. In very rare cases, when in one
and the same individual are combined the genius
of power and of knowledge and the moral genius,
there is added to the above-mentioned pains that
species of pain which must be regarded as the
most curious exception in the world ; those extra-
and super-personal sensations which are experienced
on behalf of a nation, of humanity, of all civili-
sation, all suffering existence, which acquire their
value through the connection with particularly
difficult and remote perceptions (pity in itself is
worth but little). But what standard, what proof
is there for its genuineness ? Is it not almost
imperative to be mistrustful of all who talk of
feeling sensations of this kind ?

158.

The Destiny of Greatness. — Every great
phenomenon is followed by degeneration, especially

VOL. I, L



1 62



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



in the world of art. The example of the great
tempts vainer natures to superficial imitation or
exaggeration ; all great gifts have the fatality of
crushing many weaker forces and germs, and
of laying waste all nature around them. The
happiest arrangement in the development of an
art is for several geniuses mutually to hold one
another within bounds ; in this strife it generally
happens that light and air are also granted to the
weaker and more delicate natures.



159.

Art Dangerous for the Artist. — When
art takes strong hold of an individual it draws
him back to the contemplation of those times
when art flourished best, and it has then a retro-
grade effect. The artist grows more and more
to reverence sudden inspirations ; he believes in
gods and daemons, he spiritualises all nature,
hates science, is changeable in his moods like the
ancients, and longs for an overthrow of all exist-
ing conditions which are not favourable to art,
and does this with the impetuosity and unreason-
ableness of a child. Now, in himself, the artist
is already a backward nature, because he halts at
a game that belongs properly to youth and child-
hood ; to this is added the fact that he is educated
back into former times. Thus there gradually
arises a fierce antagonism between him and his
contemporaries, and a sad ending; according to
the accounts of the ancients, Homer and ^Eschylus
spent their last years, and died, in melancholy.



I



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 63



160.



Created Individuals. — When it is said that
the dramatist (and the artist above all) creates real
characters, it is a fine deception and exaggeration,
in the existence and propagation of which art cele-
brates one of its unconscious but at the same time
abundant triumphs. As a matter of fact, we do
not understand much about a real, living man, and
we generalise very superficially when we ascribe to
him this and that character; this very imperfect
attitude of ours towards man is represented by
the poet, inasmuch as he makes into men (in
this sense " creates ") outlines as superficial as our
knowledge of man is superficial. There is a great
deal of delusion about these created characters of
artists ; they are by no means living productions
of nature, but are like painted men, somewhat too
thin, they will not bear a close inspection. And
when it is said that the character of the ordinary
living being contradicts itself frequently, and that
the one created by the dramatist is the original
model conceived by nature, this is quite wrong.
A genuine man is something absolutely necessary
(even in those so-called contradictions), but we
do not always recognise this necessity. The
imaginary man, the phantasm, signifies something
necessary, but only to those who understand a real
man only in a crude, unnatural simplification, so
that a few strong, oft-repeated traits, with a great
K B deal of light and shade and half-light about them,
I R amply satisfy their notions. They are, therefore,
I K, '^eady to treat the phantasm as a genuine, necessary



l64 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

man, because with real men they are accustomed
to regard a phantasm, an outline, an intentional
abbreviation as the whole. That the painter and
the sculptor express the " idea " of man is a vain
imagination and delusion ; whoever says this is in
subjection to the eye, for this only sees the
surface, the epidermis of the human body, — the
inward body, however, is equally a part of the
idea. Plastic art wishes to make character visible
on 'the surface; histrionic art employs speech for
the same purpose, it reflects character in sounds.
Art starts from the natural ignorance of man about
his interior condition (in body and character) ; it is
not meant for philosophers or natural scientists.

i6i.

The Over-valuation of Self in the
Belief in Artists and Philosophers. — We
are all prone to think that the excellence of a
work of art or of an artist is proved when it moves
and touches us. But there our own excellence in
judgment and sensibility must have been proved
first, which is not the case. In all plastic art, who
had greater power to effect a charm than Bernini,
who made a greater effect than the orator that
appeared after Demosthenes introduced the Asiatic
style and gave it a predominance which lasted
throughout two centuries? This predominance
during whole centuries is not a proof of the
excellence and enduring validity of a style ;
therefore we must not be too certain in our good
opinion of any artist, — this is not only belief



Ii»



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 65



"■'In the truthfulness of our sensations but also in
the infallibility of our judgment, whereas judgment
or sensation, or even both, may be too coarse or
too fine, exaggerated or crude. Neither are the
blessings and blissfulness of a philosophy or of a
religion proofs of its truth ; just as little as the
happiness which an insane person derives from his
fixed idea is a proof of the reasonableness of this
idea.

162.

The Cult of Genius for the sake of
Vanity. — Because we think well of ourselves, but
nevertheless do not imagine that we are capable
of the conception of one of Raphael's pictures or
of a scene such as those of one of Shakespeare's
dramas, we persuade ourselves that the faculty
for doing this is quite extraordinarily wonderful, a
very rare case, or, if we are religiously inclined, a
grace from above. Thus the cult of genius fosters
our vanity, our self-love, for it is only when we
think of it as very far removed from us, as a
miraculum^ that it does not wound us (even
Goethe, who was free from envy, called Shakespeare
a star of the farthest heavens, whereby we are
reminded of the line " die Sterne, die begehrt man
nicht " *). But, apart from those suggestions of our

* The allusion is to Goethe's lines :

Die Sterne, die begehrt man nicht,
Man freut sick ihrer Pracht.

We do not want the stars themselves,
Their brilliancy delights our hearts. — J. M. K.



1 66 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

vanity, the activity of a genius does not seem so
radically different from the activity of a mechanical
inventor, of an astronomer or historian or strategist.
All these forms of activity are explicable if we
realise men whose minds are active in one special
direction, who make use of everything as material,
who always eagerly study their own inward life
and that of others, who find types and incitements
everywhere, who never weary in the employment
of their means. Genius does nothing but learn
how to lay stones, then to build, always to seek for
material and always to work upon it. Every
human activity is marvellously complicated, and
not only that of genius, but it is no " miracle."
Now whence comes the belief that genius is found
only in artists, orators, and philosophers, that they
alone have " intuition" (by which we credit them
with a kind of magic glass by means of which
they see straight into one's " being ") ? It is clear
that men only speak of genius where the workings
of a great intellect are most agreeable to them
and they have no desire to feel envious. To call
any one " divine " is as much as saying " here we
have no occasion for rivalry." Thus it is that
everything completed and perfect is stared at,
and everything incomplete is undervalued. Now
nobody can see how the work of an artist has
developed; that is its advantage, for everything of
which the development is seen is looked on coldly.
The perfected art of representation precludes all
thought of its development, it tyrannises as a
present perfection. For this reason artists of
representation are especially held to be possessed



I



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 167

of genius, but not scientific men. In reality,
however, the former valuation and the latter
under-valuation are only puerilities of reason.



163.

The Earnestness of Handicraft. — Do
not talk of gifts, of inborn talents ! We could
mention great men of all kinds who were but
little gifted. But they obtained greatness, became
" geniuses " (as they are called), through qualities
of the lack of which nobody who is conscious of
them likes to speak. They all had that thorough
earnestness for work which learns first how to
form the different parts perfectly before it ventures
to make a great whole ; they gave themselves time
for this, because they took more pleasure in doing
small, accessory things well than in the effect of
a dazzling whole. For instance, the recipe for
becoming a good novelist is easily given, but the
carrying out of the recipe presupposes qualities
which we are in the habit of overlooking when we
say, " I have not sufficient talent." Make a
hundred or more sketches of novel-plots, none
more than two pages long, but of such clearness
that every word in them is necessary ; write down
anecdotes every day until you learn to find the
most pregnant, most effective form ; never weary
of collecting and delineating human types and
X characters ; above all, narrate things as often as
K possible and listen to narrations with a sharp
B eye and ear for the effect upon other people
■ present ; travel like a landscape painter and a

h



l68 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

designer of costumes ; take from different sciences
everything that is artistically effective, if it be
well represented ; finally, meditate on the motives
for human actions, scorn not even the smallest
point of instruction on this subject, and collect
similar matters by day and night. Spend some
ten years in these various exercises : then the
creations of your study may be allowed to see the
light of day. But what do most people do, on
the contrary? They do not begin with the part,
but with the whole. Perhaps they make one
good stroke, excite attention, and ever afterwards
their work grows worse and worse, for good,
natural reasons. But sometimes, when intellect
and character are lacking for the formation of
such an artistic career, fate and necessity take
the place of these qualities and lead the future
master step by step through all the phases of his
craft.

164.

The Danger and the Gain in the Cult
OF Genius. — The belief in great, superior, fertile
minds is not necessarily, but still very frequently,
connected with that wholly or partly religious
superstition that those spirits are of superhuman
origin and possess certain marvellous faculties,
by means of which they obtained their knowledge
in ways quite different from the rest of mankind.
They are credited with having an immediate
insight into the nature of the world, through
a peep-hole in the mantle of the phenomenon as
it were, and it is believed that, without the



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTPIORS. 1 69

trouble and seventy of science, by virtue of
this marvellous prophetic sight, they could
impart something final and decisive about man-
kind and the world. So long as there are
still believers in miracles in the world of
knowledge it may perhaps be admitted that
the believers themselves derive a benefit therefrom,
inasmuch as by their absolute subjection to great
minds they obtain the best discipline and schooling
for their own minds during the period of develop-
ment. On the other hand, it may at least be
questioned whether the superstition of genius,
of its privileges and special faculties, is useful
for a genius himself when it implants itself in
him. In any case it is a dangerous sign when
man shudders at his own self, be it that famous
Caesarian shudder or the shudder of genius which
applies to this case, when the incense of sacrifice,
which by rights is offered to a God alone,
penetrates into the brain of the genius, so that
he begins to waver and to look upon himself
as something superhuman. The slow conse-
quences are : the feeling of irresponsibility, the
exceptional rights, the belief that mere inter-
course with him confers a favour, and frantic rage
at any attempt to compare him with others or
even to place him below them and to bring into
prominence whatever is unsuccessful in his work.
Through the fact that he ceases to criticise
himself one pinion after another falls out of
his plumage, — that superstition undermines the
foundation of his strength and even makes
him a hypocrite after his power has failed him.



170 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

For great minds it is, therefore, perhaps better
when they come to an understanding about their
strength and its source, when they comprehend
what purely human qualities are mingled in them,
what a combination they are of fortunate
conditions : thus once it was continual energy,
a decided application to individual aims, great
personal courage, and then the good fortune of
an education, which at an early period provided
the best teachers, examples, and methods.
Assuredly, if its aim is to make the greatest
possible effect^ abstruseness has always done
much for itself and that gift of partial insanity ;
for at all times that power has been admired
and envied by means of which men were deprived
of will and imbued with the fancy that they
were preceded by supernatural leaders. Truly,
men are exalted and inspired by the belief that
some one among them is endowed with super-
natural powers, and in this respect insanity, as
Plato says, has brought the greatest blessings
to mankind. In a few rare cases this form of
insanity may also have been the means by which
an all-round exuberant nature was kept within
bounds ; in individual life the imaginings of
frenzy frequently exert the virtue of remedies
which are poisons in themselves ; but in every
" genius " that believes in his own divinity the
poison shows itself at last in the same proportion
as the " genius " grows old ; we need but
recollect the example of Napoleon, for it was
most assuredly through his faith in himself and his
star, and through his scorn of mankind, that he



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 171

grew to that mighty unity which distinguished
him from all modern men, until at last, however,
this faith developed into an almost insane
fatalism, robbed him of his quickness of compre-
hension and penetration, and was the cause of
his downfall.

165.

Genius and Nullity, — It is precisely the
07-iginal artists, those who create out of their
own heads, who in certain circumstances can
bring forth complete emptiness and husk, whilst
the more dependent natures, the so-called talented
ones, are full of memories of all manner of good-
ness, and even in a state of weakness produce
something tolerable. But if the original ones are
abandoned by themselves, memory renders them
no assistance ; they become empty.

166.

The Public. — The people really demands
nothing more from tragedy than to be deeply
affected, in order to have a good cry occasionally ;
the artist, on the contrary, who sees the new
tragedy, takes pleasure in the clever technical
inventions and tricks, in the management and
distribution of the material, in the novel arrange-
ment of old motives and old ideas. His
attitude is the aesthetic attitude towards a work
of art, that of the creator ; the one first described,
with regard solely to the material, is that of
the people. Of the individual who stands between



172



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the two nothing need be said : he is neither
" people " nor artist, and does not know what
he wants — therefore his pleasure is also clouded
and insignificant.

167.

The Artistic Education of the Public. —
If the same motif is not employed in a hundred
ways by different masters, the public never learns
to get beyond their interest in the subject ; but
at last, when it is well acquainted with the
motif through countless different treatments, and
no longer finds in it any charm of novelty or
excitement, it will then begin to grasp and enjoy
the various shades and delicate new inventions
in its treatment.

168.

The Artist and his Followers must
KEEP IN Step. — The progress from one grade
of style to another must be so slow that not
only the artists but also the auditors and
spectators can follow it and know exactly what
is going on. Otherwise there will suddenly appear
that great chasm between the artist, who creates
his work upon a height apart, and the public,
who cannot rise up to that height and finally
sinks discontentedly deeper. For when the
artist no longer raises his public it rapidly sinks
downwards, and its fall is the deeper and more
dangerous in proportion to the height to which
genius has carried it, like the eagle, out of
whose talons a tortoise that has been borne up
into the clouds falls to its destruction.



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 173
169.

The Source of the Comic Element. — If
we consider that for many thousands of years
man was an animal that was susceptible in the
highest degree to fear, and that everything sudden
and unexpected had to find him ready for battle,
perhaps even ready for death ; that even later,
in social relations, all security was based on
the expected, on custom in thought and action,
we need not be surprised that at everything
sudden and unexpected in word and deed, if
it occurs without danger or injury, man becomes
exuberant and passes over into the very opposite
of fear — the terrified, trembling, crouching being
shoots upward, stretches itself: man Jaughs.
This transition from momentary fear into short-
lived exhilaration is called the Comic. On the
other hand, in the tragic phenomenon, man passes
quickly from great enduring exuberance into
great fear ; but as amongst mortals great and
lasting exuberance is much rarer than the cause
for fear, there is far more comedy than tragedy
in the world ; we laugh much oftener than we
are agitated.

170.

The Artist's Ambition. — The Greek artists,
the tragedians for instance, composed in order to
conquer ; their whole art cannot be imagined
without rivalry, — the good Hesiodian Eris,
Ambition, gave wings to their genius. This
ambition further demanded that their work



174 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

should achieve the greatest excellence in their
own eyes, as they understood excellence, without
any regard for the reigning taste and the general
opinion about excellence in a work of art; and
thus it was long before ^Eschylus and Euripides
achieved any success, until at last they educated
judges of art, who valued their work according to
the standards which they themselves appointed.
Hence they strove for victory over rivals accord-
ing to their own valuation, they really wished to
be more excellent ; they demanded assent from
without to this self-valuation, the confirmation of
this verdict. To achieve honour means in this
case " to make one's self superior to others, and
to desire that this should be recognised publicly,"
Should the former condition be wanting, and the
latter nevertheless desired, it is then called vanity.
Should the latter be lacking and not missed, then
it is W2xa&^ pride.

171.

What is Needful to a Work of Art. —
Those who talk so much about the needful
factors of a work of art exaggerate ; if they are
artists they do so in majorein artis gloriam, if they
are laymen, from ignorance. The form of a
work of art, which gives speech to their thoughts
and is, therefore, their mode of talking, is always
somewhat uncertain, like all kinds of speech.
The sculptor can add or omit many little traits,
as can also the exponent, be he an actor or, in
music, a performer or conductor. These many
little traits and finishing touches afford him




THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 175

pleasure one day and none the next, they exist
more for the sake of the artist than the art ; for
he also has occasionally need of sweetmeats and
playthings to prevent him from becoming morose
with the severity and self-restraint which the
representation of the dominant idea demands
from him.

172.

To Cause the Master to be Forgotten.
— The pianoforte player who executes the work
of a master will have played best if he has made
his audience forget the master, and if it seemed
as if he were relating a story from his own
life or just passing through some experience.
Assuredly, if he is of no importance, every one
will abhor the garrulity with which he talks
about his own life. Therefore he must know
how to influence his hearer's imagination favour-
ably towards himself Hereby are explained all
the weaknesses and follies of " the virtuoso."

173.

CoRRiGER LA FORTUNE, — There are unfortunate
accidents in the lives of great artists, which
compel the painter, for instance, to sketch out
his most important picture only as a passing
thought, or such as obliged Beethoven to leave
behind him only the insufficient pianoforte score
of many great sonatas (as in the great B flat).
In these cases the artist of a later day must
endeavour to fill out the life of the great man, —
what, for instance, he would do who, as master



II



1/6



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



of all orchestral effects, would call into life that
symphony which has fallen into the piano-trance.

174.

Reducing. — Many things, events, or persons,
cannot bear treatment on a small scale. The
Laocoon group cannot be reduced to a knick-
knack ; great size is necessary to it. But more
seldom still does anything that is naturally small
bear enlargement ; for which reason biographers
succeed far oftener in representing a great man as
small than a small one as great.

175.

Sensuousness in Present-day Art. —
Artists nowadays frequently miscalculate when
they count on the sensuous effect of their works,
for their spectators or hearers have no longer a
fully sensuous nature, and, quite contrary to the
artist's intention, his work produces in them a
" holiness " of feeling which is closely related to
boredom. Their sensuousness begins, perhaps, just
where that of the artist ceases ; they meet, therefore,
only at one point at the most.



176.

Shakespeare as a Moralist. — Shakespeare
meditated much on the passions, and on account
of his temperament had probably a close acquaint-
ance with many of them (dramatists are in
general rather wicked men). He could, however




THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. Y'j'^

not talk on the subject, like Montaigne, but put
his observations thereon into the mouths of im-
passioned figures, which is contrary to nature,
certainly, but makes his dramas so rich in thought
that they cause all others to seem poor in com-
parison and readily arouse a general aversion to
them. Schiller's reflections (which are almost
always based on erroneous or trivial fancies) are
just theatrical reflections, and as such are very
effective ; whereas Shakespeare's reflections do
honour to his model, Montaigne, and contain
quite serious thoughts in polished form, but on
that account are too remote and refined for the
eyes of the theatrical public, and are consequently
ineffective.

177.

Securing a Good Hearing. — It is not
sufficient to know how to play well ; one must
also know how to secure a good hearing. A
violin in the hand of the greatest master gives
only a little squeak when the place where it is
heard is too large ; the master may then be
mistaken for any bungler.

178.

The Incomplete as the Effective. — Just
as figures in relief make such a strong impression
on the imagination because they seem in the act of
emerging from the wall and only stopped by some
sudden hindrance ; so the relief-like, incomplete
representation of a thought, or a whole philosophy,
is sometimes more effective than its exhaustive

VOL. I. M



178



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



amplification, — more is left for the investigation of
the onlooker, he is incited to the further study of
that which stands out before him in such strong
light and shade ; he is prompted to think out the
subject, and even to overcome the hindrance which
hitherto prevented it from emerging clearly.

179.

Against the Eccentric. — When art arrays
itself in the most shabby material it is most
easily recognised as art.

180.

Collective Intellect. — A good author
possesses not only his own intellect, but also that
of his friends.

181.

Different Kinds of Mistakes. — The mis-
fortune of acute and clear authors is that people
consider them as shallow and therefore do not
devote any effort to them ; and the good fortune of
obscure writers is that the reader makes an effort
to understand them and places the delight in his
own zeal to their credit.



182.



Relation to Science. — None of the people
have any real interest in a science, who only begin
to be enthusiastic about it when they themselves
nave made discoveries in it.



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1/9

183.

The Key. — The single thought on which an
eminent man sets a great value, arousing the
derision and laughter of the masses, is for him a
key to hidden treasures ; for them, however, it is
nothing more than a piece of old iron.

184.

Untranslatable. — It is neither the best nor
the worst parts of a book which are untranslatable.

185.

Authors' Paradoxes. — The so-called para-
doxes of an author to which a reader objects are
often not in the author's book at all, but in the
reader's head.

186.

Wit. — The wittiest authors produce a scarcely
noticeable smile.

187.

Antithesis. — Antithesis is the narrow gate
through which error is fondest of sneaking to the
truth.

188.

Thinkers as Stylists. — Most thinkers write
badly, because they communicate not only their
thoughts, but also the thinking of them.



i8o



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



189.

Thoughts in Poetry. — The poet conveys
his thoughts ceremoniously in the vehicle of«,
rhythm, usually because they are not able to go
on foot.

190.

The Sin against the Reader's Intellect.
— When an author renounces his talent in order
merely to put himself on a level with the reader,
he commits the only deadly sin which the latter
will never forgive, should he notice anything of it.
One may say everything that is bad about a
person, but in the manner in which it is said one
must know how to revive his vanity anew.

191.

The Limits of Uprightness. — Even the
most upright author lets fall a word too much
when he wishes to round off a period.

192.

The Best Author. — The best author will be
he who is ashamed to become one.



193.

Draconian Lav^ against Authors. — One
should regard authors as criminals who only
obtain acquittal or mercy in the rarest cases, —
that would be a remedy for books becoming too
rife.



w



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. l8l



194.

The Fools of Modern Culture. — The fools
of mediaeval courts correspond to our feuilleton
writers ; they are the same kind of men, semi-
rational, witty, extravagant, foolish, sometimes
there only for the purpose of lessening the pathos
of the outlook with fancies and chatter, and of
drowning with their clamour the far too deep and
solemn chimes of great events ; they were formerly
in the service of princes and nobles, now they are in
the service of parties (since a large portion of the
old obsequiousness in the intercourse of the people
with their prince still survives in party-feeling and
party-discipline). Modern literary men, however,
are generally very similar to the feuilleton writers,
they are the " fools of modern culture," whom one
judges more leniently when one does not regard
them as fully responsible beings. To look upon
writing as a regular profession should justly be
regarded as a form of madness.

195.

After the Example of the Greeks. — It
is a great hindrance to knowledge at present
that, owing to centuries of exaggeration of feeling,
all words have become vague and inflated. The
higher stage of culture, which is under the sway
(though not under the tyranny) of knowledge,
requires great sobriety of feeling and thorough
concentration of words — on which points the
Greeks in the time of Demosthenes set an




l82



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



example to us. Exaggeration is a distinguishing
mark of all modern writings, and even when
they are simply written the expressions therein
are still felt as too eccentric. Careful reflection,
conciseness, coldness, plainness, even carried
intentionally to the farthest limits, — in a word,
suppression of feeling and taciturnity, — these
are the only remedies. For the rest, this cold
manner of writing and feeling is now very
attractive, as a contrast ; and to be sure there is a
new danger therein. For intense cold is as good
a stimulus as a high degree of warmth.



196.

Good Narrators, Bad Explainers. — In
good narrators there is often found an admirable
psychological sureness and logicalness, as far
as these qualities can be observed in the actions'
of their personages, in positively ludicrous contrast
to their inexperienced pyschological reasoning,
so that their culture appears to be as extra-
ordinarily high one moment as it seems regret-
tably defective the next. It happens far too
frequently that they give an evidently false ex-
planation of their own heroes and their actions, —
of this there is no doubt, however improbable
the thing may appear. It is quite likely that
the greatest pianoforte player has thought but
little about the technical conditions and the
special virtues, drawbacks, usefulness, and tract-
ability of each finger (dactylic ethics), and makes
big mistakes whenever he speaks of such things.



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 83
197.

The Writings of Acquaintances and
THEIR Readers. — We read the writings of our
acquaintances (friends and enemies) in a double
sense, inasmuch as our perception constantly
whispers, " That is something of himself, a
remembrance of his inward being, his experiences,
his talents," and at the same time another kind
of perception endeavours to estimate the profit
of the work in itself, what valuation it merits
apart from its author, how far it will enrich
knowledge. These two manners of reading and
estimating interfere with each other, as may
naturally be supposed. And a conversation with
a friend will only bear good fruit of knowledge
when both think only of the matter under
consideration and forget that they are friends.



198.

Rhythmical Sacrifice. — Good writers alter
the rhythm of many a period merely because they
do not credit the general reader with the ability
to comprehend the measure followed by the
period in its first version ; thus they make it
easier for the reader, by giving the preference
to the better known rhythms. This regard for
the rhythmical incapacity of the modern reader
has already called forth many a sigh, for much
has been sacrificed to it. Does not the same
thing happen to good musicians ?



ii



l84



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



199.

The Incomplete as an Artistic Stimulus.
— The incomplete is often more effective than
perfection, and this is the case with eulogies.
To effect their purpose a stimulating incomplete-
ness is necessary, as an irrational element, which
calls up a sea before the hearer's imagination,
and, like a mist, conceals the opposite coast, i.e.
the limits of the object of praise. If the well-
known merits of a person are referred to and
described at length and in detail, it always
gives rise to the suspicion that these are his only
merits. The perfect eulogist takes his stand
above the person praised, he appears to overlook
him. Therefore complete praise has a weakening
efTect.

200.

Precautions in Writing and Teaching.
— Whoever has once written and has been seized
with the passion for writing learns from almost
all that he does and experiences that which is
literally communicable. He thinks no longer
of himself, but of the author and his public ;
he desires insight into things ; but not for his
own use. He who teaches is mostly incapable
of doing anything for his own good : he is always
thinking of the good of his scholars, and all
knowledge delights him only in so far as he
is able to teach it. He comes at last to regard
himself as a medium of knowledge, and above
all as a means thereto, so that he has lost all
serious consideration for himself,



r



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 85



201.



The Necessity for Bad Authors. — There
will always be a need of bad authors ; for they
meet the taste of readers of an undeveloped,
immature age — these have their requirements as
well as mature readers. If human life were of
greater length, the number of mature individuals
would be greater than that of the immature,
or at least equally great; but, as it is, by far
the greater number die too young: i.e. there
are always many more undeveloped intellects
with bad taste. These demand, with the greater
impetuosity of youth, the satisfaction of their
needs, and they insist on having bad authors.

202.

Too Near and too Far. — The reader and
the author very often do not understand each
other, because the author knows his theme too
well and finds it almost slow, so that he omits
the examples, of which he knows hundreds ;
the reader, however, is interested in the subject,
and is liable to consider it as badly proved if
examples are lacking.

203.

A Vanished Preparation for Art. — Of
everything that was practised in public schools,
the thing of greatest value was the exercise in
Latin style, — this was an e:>?ercise in art, whilst all



1 86 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

other occupations aimed only at the acquirement
of knowledge. It is a barbarism to put German
composition before it, for there is no typical
German style developed by public oratory ; but if
there is a desire to advance practice in thought
by means of German composition, then it is
certainly better for the time being to pay no
attention to style, to separate the practice in
thought, therefore, from the practice in reproduc-
tion. The latter should confine itself to the
various modes of presenting a given subject, and
should not concern itself with the independent
finding of a subject. The mere presentment of a
given subject was the task of the Latin style, for
which the old teachers possessed a long vanished
delicacy of ear. Formerly, whoever learned to
write well in a modern language had to thank
this practice for the acquirement (now we are
obliged to go to school to the older French
writers). But yet more : he obtained an idea of
the loftiness and difficulty of form, and was
prepared for art in the only right way : by
practice.

204.

Darkness and Over-Brightness Side by
Side. — Authors who, in general, do not under-
stand how to express their thoughts clearly are
fond of choosing, in detail, the strongest, most
exaggerated distinctions and superlatives, — there-
by is produced an effect of light, which is like
torchlight in intricate forest paths,



r



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 87



205.



h



Literary Painting. — An important object
will be best described if the colours for the
painting are taken out of the object itself, as a
chemist does, and then employed like an artist,
so that the drawing develops from the outlines
and transitions of the colours. Thus the painting
acquires something of the entrancing natural
element which gives such importance to the object
itself.

206.

Books which Teach how to Dance. —
There are authors who, by representing the
impossible as possible, and by talking of morality
and cleverness as if both were merely moods and
humours assumed at will, produce a feeling of
exuberant freedom, as if man stood on tiptoe and
were compelled to dance from sheer, inward
delight.

207.

Unfinished Thoughts. — Just as not only
manhood, but also youth and childhood have a
value per se^ and are not to be looked upon merely
as passages and bridges, so also unfinished
thoughts have their value. For this reason we
must not torment a poet with subtle explanations,
but must take pleasure in the uncertainty of his
horizon, as if the way to further thoughts were still
open. We stand on the threshold ; we wait as
for the digging up of a treasure, it is as if a well
of profundity were about to be discovered. The



i88



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



poet anticipates something of the thinker's
pleasure in the discovery of a leading thought, and
makes us covetous, so that we give chase to it ;
but it flutters past our head and exhibits the
loveliest butterfly-wings, — and yet it escapes us.



208.

The Book Grown almost into a Human
Being. — Every author is surprised anew at the
way in which his book, as soon as he has sent it
out, continues to live a life of its own ; it seems
to him as if one part of an insect had been cut
off and now went on its own way. Perhaps he
forgets it almost entirely, perhaps he rises above
the view expressed therein, perhaps even he under-
stands it no longer, and has lost that impulse
upon which he soared at the time he conceived
the book ; meanwhile it seeks its readers, inflames
life, pleases, horrifies, inspires new works, becomes
the soul of designs and actions, — in short, it lives
like a creature endowed with mind and soul, and
yet is no human being. The happiest fate is that
of the author who, as an old man, is able to say
that all there was in him of life-inspiring,
strengthening, exalting, enlightening thoughts and
feelings still lives on in his writings, and that he
himself now only represents the gray ashes, whilst
the fire has been kept alive and spread out. And
if we consider that every human action, not only
a book, is in some way or other the cause of other
actions, decisions, and thoughts ; that everything
that happens is inseparably connected with every-



11



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 89

thing that is going to happen, we recognise the
real immortality, that of movement, — that which
has once moved is enclosed and immortalised in
the general union of all existence, like an insect
within a piece of amber.

209.

Joy in Old Age. — The thinker, as likewise
the artist, who has put his best self into his works,
feels an almost malicious joy when he sees how
mind and body are being slowly damaged and
destroyed by time, as if from a dark corner he
were spying a thief at his money-chest, knowing
all the time that it was empty and his treasures
in safety.

210.

Quiet Fruitfulness. — The born aristocrats
of the mind are not in too much of a hurry ; their
creations appear and fall from the tree on some
quiet autumn evening, without being rashly
desired, instigated, or pushed aside by new
matter. The unceasing desire to create is vulgar,
and betrays envy, jealousy, and ambition. If a
man is something, it is not really necessary for
him to do anything — and yet he does a great
deal. There is a human species higher even than
the " productive " man.

2X1.

Achilles and Homer. — It is always like
the case of Achilles and Homer, — the one has




IpO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



1



the experiences and sensations, the other describes
them. A genuine author only puts into words
the feelings and adventures of others, he is an
artist, and divines much from the little he has
experienced. Artists are by no means creatures
of great passion ; but they frequently represent
themselves as such with the unconscious feeling
that their depicted passion will be better believed
in if their own life gives credence to their experi-
ence in these affairs. They need only let them-
selves go, not control themselves, and give free play
to their anger and their desires, and every one will
immediately cry out, " How passionate he is ! " But
the deeply stirring passion that consumes and often
destroys the individual is another matter: those
who have really experienced it do not describe it
in dramas, harmonies or romances. Artists are
frequently unbridled individuals, in so far as they
are not artists, but that is a different thing.

212.

Old Doubts about the Effect of Art.
— Should pity and fear really be unburdened
through tragedy, as Aristotle would have it, so
that the hearers return home colder and quieter?
Should ghost-stories really make us less fearful
and superstitious ? In the case of certain
physical processes, in the satisfaction of love, for
instance, it is true that with the fulfilment of a
need there follows an alleviation and temporary
decrease in the impulse. But fear and pity are
not in this sense the needs of particular organs



li



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. I9I

which require to be relieved. And in time
every instinct is even strengthened by practice
in its satisfaction, in spite of that periodical
mitigation. It might be possible that in each
single case pity and fear would be soothed and
relieved by tragedy ; nevertheless, they might, on
the whole, be increased by tragic influences, and
Plato would be right in saying that tragedy
makes us altogether more timid and susceptible.
The tragic poet himself would then of necessity
acquire a gloomy and fearful view of the world,
and a yielding, irritable, tearful soul ; it would
also agree with Plato's view if the tragic poets,
and likewise the entire part of the community
that derived particular pleasure from them,
degenerated into ever greater licentiousness and
intemperance. But what right, indeed, has our
age to give an answer to that great question of
Plato's as to the moral influence of art ? If we
even had art, — where have we an influence, any
kind of an art-influence ?



213.

Pleasure in Nonsense. — How can we take
pleasure in nonsense? But wherever there is
laughter in the world this is the case: it may
even be said that almost everywhere where there
is happiness, there is found pleasure in nonsense.
The transformation of experience into its opposite,
of the suitable into the unsuitable, the obligatory
into the optional (but in such a manner that
this process produces no injury and is only




192 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

imagined in jest), is a pleasure ; for it tempor-
arily liberates us from the yoke of the obligatory,
suitable and experienced, in which we usually
find our pitiless masters ; we play and laugh
when the expected (which generally causes fear
and expectancy) happens without bringing any
injury. It is the pleasure felt by slaves in the
Saturnalian feasts

214.

The Ennobling of Reality. — Through the
fact that in the aphrodisiac impulse men discerned
a godhead and with adoring gratitude felt it
working within themselves, this emotion has in
the course of time become imbued with higher
conceptions, and has thereby been materially
ennobled. Thus certain nations, by virtue of
this art of idealisation, have created great aids to
culture out of diseases, — the Greeks, for instance,
who in earlier centuries suffered from great
nervous epidemics (like epilepsy and St. Vitus*
Dance), and developed out of them the splendid
type of the Bacchante. The Greeks, however, en-
joyed an astonishingly high degree of health —
their secret was, to revere even disease as a god,
if it only possessed power.

215.

Music. — Music by and for itself is not so
portentous for our inward nature, so deeply
moving, that it ought to be looked upon as the
direct language of the feelings ; but its ancient
union with poetry has infused so much symbolism



II



ll#



L



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. I93

into rhythmical movement, into loudness and
softness of tone, that we now hnagine it speaks
directly to and comes from the inward nature.
Dramatic music is only possible when the art
of harmony has acquired an immense range of
symbolical means, through song, opera, and a
hundred attempts at description by sound.
" Absolute music " is either form per se, in
the rude condition of music, when playing in
time and with various degrees of strength gives
pleasure, or the symbolism of form which speaks
to the understanding even without poetry, after
the two arts were joined finally together after
long development and the musical form had been
woven about with threads of meaning and feeling.
People who are backward in musical develop-
ment can appreciate a piece of harmony merely
as execution, whilst those who are advanced will
comprehend it symbolically. No music is deep
and full of meaning in itself, it does not speak
of "will," of the "thing-in-itself"; that could be
imagined by the intellect only in an age which
had conquered for musical symbolism the entire
range of inner life. It was the intellect itself
that first g-ave this meaning to sound, just as it
also gave meaning to the relation between lines
and masses in architecture, but which in itself is
quite foreign to mechanical laws.

216.

Gesture and Speech. — Older than speech is
the imitation of gestures, which is carried on un-

L. I. N



194



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



consciously and which, in the general repression of
the language of gesture and trained control of the
muscles, is still so great that we cannot look at a
face moved by emotion without feeling an agita-
tion of our own face (it may be remarked that
feigned yawning excites real yawning in any one
who sees it). The imitated gesture leads the one
who imitates back to the sensation it expressed
in the face or body of the one imitated. Thus
men learned to understand one another, thus the
child still learns to understand the mother.
Generally speaking, painful sensations may also
have been expressed by gestures, and the pain
which caused them (for instance, tearing the hair,
beating the breast, forcible distortion and straining
of the muscles of the face). On the other hand,
gestures of joy were themselves joyful and lent
themselves easily to the communication of the
understanding; (laughter, as the expression of
the feeling when being tickled, serves also for the
expression of other pleasurable sensations). As
soon as men understood each other by gestures,
there could be established a symbolism of gestures ;
I mean, an understanding could be arrived at
respecting the language of accents, so that first
accent and gesture (to which it was symbolically
added) were produced, and later on the accent
alone. In former times there happened very
frequently that which now happens in the de-
velopment of music, especially of dramatic music,
— while music, without explanatory dance and
pantomime (language of gesture), is at first only
empty sound, but by long familiarity with that



I



b



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 195

combination of music and movement the ear
becomes schooled into instant interpretation of the
figures of sound, and finally attains a height of
quick understanding, where it has no longer any
need of visible movement and understands the
sound-poet without it. It is then called absolute
music, that is music in which, without further help,
everything is symbolically understood.



217.

The Spiritualising of Higher Art. — By
virtue of extraordinary intellectual exercise through
the art-development of the new music, our ears
have been growing more intellectual. For this
reason we can now endure a much greater volume
of sound, much more " noise," because we are far
better practised in listening for the sense in it
than were our ancestors. As a matter of fact,
all our senses have been somewhat blunted, because
they immediately look for the sense ; that is, they
ask what " it means " and not what " it is," — such
a blunting betrays itself, for instance, in the abso-
lute dominion of the temperature of sounds; for
ears which still make the finer distinctions, between
cis and des, for instance, are now amongst the
exceptions. In this respect our ear has grown
coarser. And then the ugly side of the world,
the one originally hostile to the senses, has been
conquered for music ; its power has been immensely
widened, especially in the expression of the noble,
the terrible, and the mysterious : our music now



196



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



gives utterance to things which had formerly no
tongue. In the same way certain painters have
rendered the eye more intellectual, and have gone
far beyond that which was formerly called pleasure
in colour and form. Here, too, that side of the
world originally considered as ugly has been
conquered by the artistic intellect. What results
from all this ? The more capable of thought that
eye and ear become, the more they approach the
limit where they become senseless, the seat of
pleasure is moved into the brain, the organs of the
senses themselves become dulled and weak, the
symbolical takes more and more the place of the
actual, — and thus we arrive at barbarism in this
way as surely as in any other. In the meantime
we may say : the world is uglier than ever, but it
represents a more beautiful world than has ever
existed. But the more the amber-scent of mean-
ing is dispersed and evaporated, the rarer become
those who perceive it, and the remainder halt at
what is ugly and endeavour to enjoy it direct, an
aim, however, which they never succeed in attain-
ing. Thus, in Germany there is a twofold direction
of musical development, here a throng of ten
thousand with ever higher, finer demands, ever
listening more and more for the " it means," and
there the immense countless mass which yearly
grows more incapable of understanding what is
important even in the form of sensual ugliness,
and which therefore turns ever more willingly to
what in music is ugly and foul in itself, that is, to
the basely sensual.



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. I97
218.

A Stone is More of a Stone than
Formerly. — As a general rule we no longer
understand architecture, at least by no means in
the same way as we understand music. We have
outgrown the symbolism of lines and figures, just
as we are no longer accustomed to the sound-
effects of rhetoric, and have not absorbed this
kind of mother's milk of culture since our first
moment of life. Everything in a Greek or Chris-
tian building originally had a meaning, and re-
ferred to a higher order of things ; this feeling of
inexhaustible meaning enveloped the edifice like
a mystic veil. Beauty was only a secondary con-
sideration in the system, without in any way
materially injuring the fundamental sentiment of
the mysteriously-exalted, the divinely and magic-
ally consecrated ; at the most, beauty tempered
horror — but this horror was everywhere pre-
supposed. What is the beauty of a building now ?
The same thing as the beautiful face of a stupid
woman, a kind of mask.



219.

The Religious Source of the Newer
Music. — Soulful music arose out of the Catholi-
cism re-established after the Council of Trent,
through Palestrina, who endowed the newly-
awakened, earnest, and deeply moved spirit with
sound; later on, in Bach, it appeared also in



198 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Protestantism, as far as this had been deepened
by the Pietists and released from its originally-
dogmatic character. The supposition and neces-
sary preparation for both origins is the familiarity
with music, which existed during and before the
Renaissance, namely that learned occupation with
music, which was really scientific pleasure in the
masterpieces of harmony and voice-training. On
the other hand, the opera must have preceded it,
wherein the layman made his protest against a
music that had grown too learned and cold, and
endeavoured to re-endow Polyhymnia with a
soul. Without the change to that deeply religious
sentiment, without the dying away of the inwardly
moved temperament, music would have remained
learned or operatic ; the spirit of the counter-
reformation is the spirit of modern music (for that
pietism in Bach's music is also a kind of counter-
reformation). So deeply are we indebted to the
religious life. Music was the counter-reformation
in the field of art ; to this belongs also the later
painting of the Caracci and Caravaggi, perhaps
also the baroque style, in any case more than the
architecture of the Renaissance or of antiquity.
And we might still ask : if our newer music could
move stones, would it build them up into antique
architecture? I very much doubt it. For that
which predominates in this music, affections,
pleasure in exalted, highly-strained sentiments, the
desire to be alive at any cost, the quick change of
feeling, the strong relief-effects of light and shade,
the combination of the ecstatic and the naive, —
all this has already reigned in the plastic arts and




THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 1 99

created new laws of style : — but it was neither in
the time of antiquity nor of the Renaissance.

220.

The Beyond in Art. — It is not without deep
pain that we acknowledge the fact that in their
loftiest soarings, artists of all ages have exalted
and divinely transfigured precisely those ideas
which we now recognise as false; they are the
glorifiers of humanity's religious and philosophical
errors, and they could not have been this without
belief in the absolute truth of these errors. But
if the belief in such truth diminishes at all, if the
rainbow colours at the farthest ends of human
knowledge and imagination fade, then this kind
of art can never re-flourish, for, like the Divina
Commedia, Raphael's paintings, Michelangelo's
frescoes, and Gothic cathedrals, they indicate not
only a cosmic but also a metaphysical meaning in
the work of art. Out of all this will grow a
touching legend that such an art and such an
artistic faith once existed.

221.

Revolution in Poetry. — The strict limit
which the French dramatists marked out with
regard to unity of action, time and place, con-
struction of style, verse and sentence, selection
of words and ideas, was a school as important as
that of counterpoint and fugue in the development
of modern music or that of the Gorgianic figures
in Greek oratory. Such a restriction may appear



200



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



absurd ; nevertheless there is no means of getting
out of naturalism except by confining ourselves
at first to the strongest (perhaps most arbitrary)
means. Thus we gradually learn to walk grace-
fully on the narrow paths that bridge giddy
abysses, and acquire great suppleness of movement
as a result, as the history of music proves to our
living eyes. Here we see how, step by step, the
fetters get looser, until at last they may appear
to be altogether thrown off; this appearance is the
highest achievement of a necessary development
in art. In the art of modern poetry there existed
no such fortunate, gradual emerging from self-
imposed fetters. Lessing held up to scorn in
Germany the French form, the only modern form
of art, and pointed to Shakespeare ; and thus the
steadiness of that unfettering was lost and a spring
was made into naturalism — that is, back into the
beginnings of art. From this Goethe endeavoured
to save himself, by always trying to limit himself
anew in different ways ; but even the most gifted
only succeeds by continuously experimenting, if
the thread of development has once been broken.
It is to the unconsciously revered, if also
repudiated, model of French tragedy that Schiller
owes his comparative sureness of form, and he
remained fairly independent of Lessing (whose
dramatic attempts he is well known to have
rejected). But after Voltaire the French them-
selves suddenly lacked the great talents which
would have led the development of tragedy out of
constraint to that apparent freedom ; later on they
followed the German example and made a spring



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 201

into a sort of Rousseau-like state of nature and
experiments. It is only necessary to read
Voltaire's " Mahomet " from time to time in order
to perceive clearly what European culture has lost
through that breaking down of tradition. Once
for all, Voltaire was the last of the great dramatists
who with Greek proportion controlled his manifold
soul, equal even to the greatest storms of tragedy,
— he was able to do what no German could, because
the French nature is much nearer akin to the
Greek than is the German ; he was also the last
great writer who in the wielding of prose possessed
the Greek ear, Greek artistic conscientiousness,
and Greek simplicity and grace ; he was, also, one
of the last men able to combine in himself the
greatest freedom of mind and an absolutely
unrevolutionary way of thinking without being
inconsistent and cowardly. Since that time the
modern spirit, with its restlessness and its hatred
of moderation and restrictions, has obtained the
mastery on all sides, let loose at first by the fever
of revolution, and then once more putting a bridle
on itself when it became filled with fear and horror
at itself, — but it was the bridle of rigid logic, no
longer that of artistic moderation. It is true that
through that unfettering for a time we are able to
enjoy the poetry of all nations, everything that
has sprung up in hidden places, original, wild,
wonderfully beautiful and gigantically irregular,
from folk-songs up to the " great barbarian "
Shakespeare ; we taste the joys of local colour
and costume, hitherto unknown to all artistic
nations ; we make liberal use of the " barbaric



202 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



1



advantages " of our time, which Goethe accentuated
against Schiller in order to place the formlessness
of his Faust in the most favourable light. But
for how much longer? The encroaching flood of
poetry of all styles and all nations must gradually
sweep away that magic garden upon which a quiet
and hidden growth would still have been possible ;
all poets must become experimenting imitators, dar-
ing copyists, however great their primary strength
may be. Eventually, the public, which has lost
the habit of seeing the actual artistic fact in the
controlling of depicting power, in the organising
mastery over all art-means, must come ever more
and more to value power for power's sake, colour
for colour's sake, idea for idea's sake, inspiration
for inspiration's sake ; accordingly it will not enjoy
the elements and conditions of the work of art,
unless isolated, and finally will make the very
natural demand that the artist must deliver it to
them isolated. True, the " senseless " fetters of
Franco-Greek art have been thrown off, but un-
consciously we have grown accustomed to consider
all fetters, all restrictions as senseless ; — and so
art moves towards its liberation, but, in so doing,
it touches — which is certainly highly edifying —
upon all the phases of its beginning, its childhood,
its incompleteness, its sometime boldness and
excesses, — in perishing it interprets its origin and
growth. One of the great ones, whose instinct
may be relied on and whose theory lacked nothing
but thirty years more of practice. Lord Byron,
once said : that with regard to poetry in general,
the more he thought about it the more convinced



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 2O3

he was that one and all we are entirely on a wrong
track, that we are following an inwardly false
revolutionary system, and that either our own
generation or the next will yet arrive at this same
conviction. It is the same Lord Byron who said
that he " looked upon Shakespeare as the very
worst model, although the most extraordinary poet."
And does not Goethe's mature artistic insight in
the second half of his life say practically the same
thing ? — that insight by means of which he made
such a bound in advance of whole generations that,
generally speaking, it may be said that Goethe's
influence has not yet begun, that his time has still
to come. Just because his nature held him fast
for a long time in the path of the poetical
revolution, just because he drank to the dregs of
whatsoever new sources, views and expedients had
been indirectly discovered through that breaking
down of tradition, of all that had been unearthed
from under the ruins of art, his later transformation
and conversion carries so much weight ; it shows
that he felt the deepest longing to win back the
traditions of art, and to give in fancy the ancient
perfection and completeness to the abandoned ruins
and colonnades of the temple, with the imagination
of the eye at least, should the strength of the arm
be found too weak to build where such tremendous
powers were needed even to destroy. Thus he
lived in art as in the remembrance of the true
art, his poetry had become an aid to remembrance,
to the understanding of old and long-departed
ages of art. With respect to the strength of the
new age, his demands could not be satisfied ; but



204



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the pain this occasioned was amply balanced by
the joy that they have been satisfied once, and that
we ourselves can still participate in this satis-
faction. Not individuals, but more or less ideal
masks ; no reality, but an allegorical generality ;
topical characters, local colours toned down and
rendered mythical almost to the point of in-
visibility ; contemporary feeling and the problems
of contemporary society reduced to the simplest
forms, stripped of their attractive, interesting
pathological qualities, made ineffective in every
other but the artistic sense ; no new materials and
characters, but the old, long-accustomed ones in
constant new animation and transformation ; that
is art, as Goethe understood it later, as the Greeks
and even the French practised it.



f



222.

What Remains of Art. — It is true that art
has a much greater value in the case of certain
metaphysical hypotheses, for instance when the
belief obtains that the character is unchangeable
and that the essence of the world manifests itself
continually in all character and action ; thus the
artist's work becomes the symbol of the eternally
constant, while according to our views the artist
can only endow his picture with temporary value,
because man on the whole has developed and is
mutable, and even the individual man has nothing
fixed and constant. The same thing holds good
with another metaphysical hypothesis : assuming
that our visible world were only a delusion, as
metaphysicians declare, then art would come very



THE SOUL OF ARTISTS AND AUTHORS. 205

near to the real world, for there would then be far
too much similarity between the world of appear-
ance and the dream-world of the artist ; and the
remaining difference would place the meaning of
art higher even than the meaning of nature,
because art would represent the same forms, the
types and models of nature. But those supposi-
tions are false ; and what position does art retain
after this acknowledgment ? Above all, for
centuries it has taught us to look upon life in
every shape with interest and pleasure and to
carry our feelings so far that at last we exclaim,
" Whatever it may be, life is good." This teaching
of art, to take pleasure in existence and to regard
human life as a piece of nature, without too
vigorous movement, as an object of regular
development, — this teaching has grown into us ;
it reappears as an all-powerful need of knowledge.
We could renounce art, but we should not there-
with forfeit the ability it has taught us, — ^just as
we have given up religion, but not the exalting
and intensifying of temperament acquired through
religion. As the plastic arts and music are the
standards of that wealth of feeling really acquired
and obtained through religion, so also, after a dis-
appearance of art, the intensity and multiplicity of
the joys of life which it had implanted in us would
still demand satisfaction. The scientific man is
the further development of the artistic man.

223.

The After-glow of Art. — Just as in old
age we remember our youth and celebrate festi-



206



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



vals of memory, so in a short time mankind will
stand towards art : its relation will be that of a
touching memory of the joys of youth. Never,
perhaps, in former ages was art dealt with so
seriously and thoughtfully as now when it appears
to be surrounded by the magic influence of death.
We call to mind that Greek city in southern
Italy, which once a year still celebrates its Greek
feasts, amidst tears and mourning, that foreign
barbarism triumphs ever more and more over the
customs its people brought with them into the
land ; and never has Hellenism been so much
appreciated, nowhere has this golden nectar been
drunk with so great delight, as amongst these fast
disappearing Hellenes. The artist will soon come
to be regarded as a splendid relic, and to him,
as to a wonderful stranger on whose power and
beauty depended the happiness of former ages,
there will be paid such honour as is not often
enjoyed by one of our race. The best in us is
perhaps inherited from the sentiments of former
times, to which it is hardly possible for us now
to return by direct ways ; the sun has already
disappeared, but the heavens of our life are still
glowing and illumined by it, although we can
behold it no longer.



FIFTH DIVISION.

THE SIGNS OF HIGHER AND
LOWER CULTURE.

224.

Ennoblement through Degeneration. —
History teaches that a race of people is best
preserved where the greater number hold one
common spirit in consequence of the similarity
of their accustomed and indisputable principles :
in consequence, therefore, of their common faith.
Thus strength is afforded by good and thorough
customs, thus is learnt the subjection of the
individual, and strenuousness of character becomes
a birth gift and afterwards is fostered as a habit.
The danger to these communities founded on
individuals of strong and similar character is
that gradually increasing stupidity through trans-
mission, which follows all stability like its shadow.
It is on the more unrestricted, more uncertain
and morally weaker individuals that depends the
intellectual progress of such communities, it is they
who attempt all that is new and manifold.
Numbers of these perish on account of their
weakness, without having achieved any specially
visible effect; but generally, particularly when
they have descendants, they flare up and from



2o8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

time to time inflict a wound on the stable element
of the community. Precisely in this sore and|
weakened place the community is inoculated with!
something new ; but its general strength must
be great enough to absorb and assimilate this
new thing into its blood. Deviating natures are
of the utmost importance wherever there is to
be progress. Every wholesale progress must be
preceded by a partial weakening. The strongest
natures retain the type, the weaker ones help it
to develop. Something similar happens in the
case of individuals ;'' a deterioration, a mutilation,
even a vice and, above all, a physical or moral
loss is seldom without its advantage. For
instance, a sickly man in the midst of a warlike
and restless race will perhaps have more chance
of being alone and thereby growing quieter and
wiser, the one-eyed man will possess a stronger
eye, the blind man will have a deeper inward
sight and will certainly have a keener sense of
hearing. In so far it appears to me that the
famous Struggle for Existence is not the only
point of view from which an explanation can be
given of the progress or strengthening of an
individual or a race. Rather must two different
things converge : firstly, the multiplying of stable
strength through mental binding in faith and
common feeling ; secondly, the possibility of
attaining to higher aims, through the fact that
there are deviating natures and, in consequence,
partial weakening and wounding of the stable
strength ; it is precisely the weaker nature, as
the more delicate and free, that makes all progress



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 20g

at all possible. A people that is crumbling and
weak in any one part, but as a whole still strong
and healthy, is able to absorb the infection of
what is new and incorporate it to its advantage.
The task of education in a single individual is
this : to plant him so firmly and surely that, as
a whole, he can no longer be diverted from his
path. Then, however, the educator must wound
him, or else make use of the wounds which fate
inflicts, and when pain and need have thus arisen,
something new and noble can be inoculated into
the wounded places. With regard to the ^tate,
Machiavelli says that, " the form of Government
is of very small importance, although half-
educated people think otherwise. The great aim
of State-craft should be duration, which out-
weighs all else, inasmuch as it is more valuable
than liberty." It is only with securely founded
and guaranteed duration that continual develop-
ment and ennobling inoculation are at all possible.
As a rule, however, authority, the dangerous com-
panion of all duration, will rise in opposition to
this.

225.

Free-Thinker a Relative Term. — We
call that man a free-thinker who thinks otherwise
than is expected of him in consideration of his
origin, surroundings, position, and office, or by
reason of the prevailing contemporary views.
He is the exception, fettered minds are the rule ;
these latter reproach him, saying that his free
principles either have their origin in a desire

VOL. I. O



2IO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



he}



to be remarkable or else cause free actions to
inferred, — that is to say, actions which are not
compatible with fettered morality. Sometimes it
is also said that the cause of such and such free
principles may be traced to mental perversity
and extravagance ; but only malice speaks thus,
nor does it believe what it says, but wishes
thereby to do an injury, for the free-thinker
usually bears the proof of his greater goodness
and keenness of intellect written in his face so
plainly that the fettered spirits understand it well
enough. But the two other derivations of free-
thought are honestly intended ; as a matter of
fact, many free-thinkers are created in one or
other of these ways. For this reason, however,
the tenets to which they attain in this manner
might be truer and more reliable than those of
the fettered spirits. In the knowledge of truth,
what really matters is the possession of it, not
the impulse under which it was sought, the way
in which it was found. If the free-thinkers are
right then the fettered spirits are vvrong, and it is
a matter of indifference whether the former have
reached truth through immorality or the latter
hitherto retained hold of untruths through
morality. Moreover, it is not essential to the
free-thinker that he should hold more correct
views, but that he should have liberated himself
from what was customary, be it successfully or
disastrously. As a rule, however, he will have
truth, or at least the spirit of truth-investigation,
on his side ; he demands reasons, the others
demand faith.



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 2tl
226.

The Origin of Faith. — The fettered spirit
does not take up his position from conviction,
but from habit ; he is a Christian, for instance,
not because he had a comprehension of different
creeds and could take his choice ; he is an
EngHshman, not because he decided for England,
but he found Christianity and England ready-
made and accepted them without any reason,
just as one who is born in a wine-country
becomes a wine-drinker. Later on, perhaps, as
he was a Christian and an Englishman, he dis-
covered a few reasons in favour of his habit;
these reasons may be upset, but he is not
therefore upset in his whole position. For
instance, let a fettered spirit be obliged to bring
forward his reasons against bigamy and then it
will be seen whether his holy zeal in favour of
monogamy is based upon reason or upon custom.
The adoption of guiding principles without reasons
is called faith.

227.

Conclusions drawn from the Conse-
quences AND TRACED BACK TO REASON AND
Un-reason. — All states and orders of society,
professions, matrimony, education, law : all these
find strength and duration only in the faith which
I the fettered spirits repose in them, — that is, in
j the absence of reasons, or at least in the averting
1^ of inquiries as to reasons. The restricted spirits
IBklo not willingly acknowledge this, and feel that



212 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



1



it is a pudendum. Christianity, however, which
was very simple in its intellectual ideas, remarked
nothing of this pudendum^ required faith and
nothing but faith, and passionately repulsed the
demand for reasons ; it pointed to the success
of faith : " You will soon feel the advantages
of faith," it suggested, " and through faith shall
ye be saved." As an actual fact, the State
pursues the same course, and every father brings
up his son in the same way : " Only believe
this," he says, " and you will soon feel the good
it does." This implies, however, that the truth
of an opinion is proved by its personal usefulness ;
the wholesomeness of a doctrine must be a
guarantee for its intellectual surety and solidity.
It is exactly as if an accused person in a court
of law were to say, " My counsel speaks the
whole truth, for only see what is the result of
his speech : I shall be acquitted." Because the
fettered spirits retain their principles on account
of their usefulness, they suppose that the free
spirit also seeks his own advantage in his views
and only holds that to be true which is profitable
to him. But as he appears to find profitable
just the contrary of that which his compatriots
or equals find profitable, these latter assume that
his principles are dangerous to them ; they say
or feel, " He must not be right, for he is injurious
to us."



228.






The Strong, Good Character. — The
restriction of views, which habit has made instinct,



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 21 3

leads to what is called strength of character.
When any one acts from (qw but always from
the same motives, his actions acquire great
energy ; if these actions accord with the principles
of the fettered spirits they are recognised, and
they produce, moreover, in those who perform
them the sensation of a good conscience. Few
motives, energetic action, and a good conscience
compose what is called strength of character.
The man of strong character lacks a knowledge
of the many possibilities and directions of action ;
his intellect is fettered and restricted, because
in a given case it shows him, perhaps, only two
possibilities ; between these two he must now
of necessity choose, in accordance with his whole
nature, and he does this easily and quickly
because he has not to choose between fifty
possibilities. The educating surroundings aim
at fettering every individual, by always placing
before him the smallest number of possibilities.
The individual is always treated by his educators
as if he were, indeed, something new, but should
become a duplicate. If he makes his first appear-
ance as something unknown, unprecedented, he
must be turned into something known and
precedented. In a child, the familiar manifesta-
tion of restriction is called a good character;
in placing itself on the side of the fettered
spirits the child first discloses its awakening
common feeling ; with this foundation of common
sentiment, he will eventually become useful tc
his State or rank.



214 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



229.

The Standards and Values of the"
Fettered Spirits. — There are four species of
things concerning which the restricted spirits say
they are in the right. Firstly : all things that last
are right; secondly: all things that are not burdens
to us are right ; thirdly : all things that are advan-
tageous for us are right ; fourthly : all things for
which we have made sacrifices are right. The last
sentence, for instance, explains why a war that
was begun in opposition to popular feeling is
carried on with enthusiasm directly a sacrifice
has been made for it. The free spirits, who
bring their case before the forum of the fettered
spirits, must prove that free spirits always existed,
that free-spiritism is therefore enduring, that it
will not become a burden, and, finally, that on
the whole they are an advantage to the fettered
spirits. It is because they cannot convince the
restricted spirits on this last point that they
profit nothing by having proved the first and
second propositions.

230.

Esprit Fort. — Compared with him who has
tradition on his side and requires no reasons
for his actions, the free spirit is always weak,
especially in action ; for he is acquainted with
too many motives and points of view, and has,
therefore, an uncertain and unpractised hand.
What means exist of making him strong in spite



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 21 5

of thiSy so that he will, at least, manage to
survive, and will not perish ineffectually?
What is the source of the strong spirit {esprit
fort) ? This is especially the question as to the
production of genius. Whence comes the energy,
the unbending strength, the endurance with which
the one, in opposition to accepted ideas,
endeavours to obtain an entirely individual
knowledge of the world ?



231.

The Rise of Genius. — The ingenuity with
which a prisoner seeks the means of freedom,
the most cold-blooded and patient employment
of every smallest advantage, can teach us of
what tools Nature sometimes makes use in order
to produce Genius, — a word which I beg will be
understood without any mythological and religious
flavour; she, Nature, begins it in a dungeon and
excites to the utmost its desire to free itself.
Or to give another picture : some one who has
completely lost his way in a wood, but who
with unusual energy strives to reach the open
in one direction or another, will sometimes dis-
cover a new path which nobody knew previously,
— thus arise geniuses, who are credited with
originality. It has already been said that mutila-
tion, crippling, or the loss of some important
organ, is frequently the cause of the unusual
development of another organ, because this one
has to fulfil its own and also another function.
This explains the source of many a brilliant



2l6



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



talent. These general remarks on the origin of
genius may be applied to the special case, the
origin of the perfect free spirit.



232.

Conjecture as to the Origin of Free-
Spiritism. — Just as the glaciers increase when in]
equatorial regions the sun shines upon the seasi
with greater force than hitherto, so may a very
strong and spreading free-spiritism be a proof
that somewhere or other the force of feeling has
grown extraordinarily.



233.

The Voice of History. — In general, history
appears to teach the following about the production
of genius : it ill-treats and torments mankind-
calls to the passions of envy, hatred, and rivalry-
drives them to desperation, people against people,
throughout whole centuries ! Then, perhaps, like
a stray spark from the terrible energy thereby
aroused, there flames up suddenly the light of
genius ; the will, like a horse maddened by the
rider's spur, thereupon breaks out and leaps over
into another domain. He who could attain to a
comprehension of the production of genius, and
desires to carry out practically the manner in
which Nature usually goes to work, would have
to be just as evil and regardless as Nature itself.
But perhaps we have not heard rightly.



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 2\^
234.

The Value of the Middle of the Road.
— It is possible that the production of genius is
reserved to a limited period of mankind's history.
For we must not expect from the future every-
thing that very defined conditions were able to
produce ; for instance, not the astounding effects
of religious feeling. This has had its day, and
much that is very good can never grow again,
because it could grow out of that alone. There
will never again be a horizon of life and culture
that is bounded by religion. Perhaps even the
type of the saint is only possible with that certain
narrowness of intellect, which apparently has com-
pletely disappeared. And thus the greatest height
of intelligence has perhaps been reserved for a
single age ; it appeared — and appears, for we are
still in that age — when an extraordinary, long-
accumulated energy of will concentrates itself, as
an exceptional case, upon intellectual aims. That
height will no longer exist when this wildness and
energy cease to be cultivated. Mankind probably
approaches nearer to its actual aim in the middle
of its road, in the middle time of its existence
than at the end. It may be that powers with
which, for instance, art is a condition, die out
altogether ; the pleasure in lying, in the undefined,
the symbolical, in intoxication, in ecstasy might fall
into disrepute. For certainly, when life is ordered
in the perfect State, the present will provide no.
more motive for poetry, and it would only be those
persons who had remained behind who would ask



2l8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

for poetical unreality. These, then, would as-
suredly look longingly backwards to the times of
the imperfect State, of half-barbaric society, to our
times.

235-

Genius and the Ideal State in Conflict.
— The Socialists demand a comfortable life for the
greatest possible number. If the lasting house of
this life of comfort, the perfect State, had really
been attained, then this life of comfort would have
destroyed the ground out of which grow the great
intellect and the mighty individual generally, I
mean powerful energy. Were this State reached,
mankind would have grown too weary to be still
capable of producing genius. Must we not hence
wish that life should retain its forcible character,
and that wild forces and energies should continue
to be called forth afresh ? But warm and sympa-
thetic hearts desire precisely the removal of that
wild and forcible character, and the warmest hearts
we can imagine desire it the most passionately of
all, whilst all the time its passion derived its fire, its
warmth, its very existence precisely from that wild
and forcible character ; the warmest heart, therefore,
desires the removal of its own foundation, the des-
truction of itself, — that is, it desires something
illogical, it is not intelligent. The highest intelli-
gence and the warmest heart cannot exist together
in one person, and the wise man who passes
judgment upon life looks beyond goodness and
only regards it as something which is not without
value in the general summing-up of life. The



J



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 219

wise man must oppose those digressive wishes of
unintelligent goodness, because he has an interest
in the continuance of his type and in the eventual
appearance of the highest intellect ; at least, he
will not advance the founding of the " perfect
State," inasmuch as there is only room in it for
wearied individuals. Christ, on the contrary, he
whom we may consider to have had the warmest
heart, advanced the process of making man stupid,
placed himself on the side of the intellectually
poor, and retarded the production of the greatest
intellect, and this was consistent. His opposite,
the man of perfect wisdom, — this may be safely
prophesied — will just as necessarily hinder the pro-
duction of a Christ. The State is a wise arrange-
ment for the protection of one individual against
another ; if its ennobling is exaggerated the indi-
vidual will at last be weakened by it, even effaced,
— thus the original purpose of the State will be
most completely frustrated.

236.

The Zones of Culture. — It may be figura-
tively said that the ages of culture correspond to
the zones of the various climates, only that they
lie one behind another and not beside each other
like the geographical zones. In comparison with
the temperate zone of culture, which it is our
object to enter, the past, speaking generally, gives
the impression of a tropical climate. Violent con-
trasts, sudden changes between day and night,
heat and colour-splendour, the reverence of all



220



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



that was sudden, mysterious, terrible, the rapidity |
with which storms broke: everywhere that lavish!
abundance of the provisions of nature ; and opposed]
to this, in our culture, a clear but by no means I
bright sky, pure but fairly unchanging air, sharp-
ness, even cold at times ; thus the two zones are;
contrasts to each other. When we see how in
that former zone the most raging passions are
suppressed and broken down with mysterious force
by metaphysical representations, we feel as if wild
tigers were being crushed before our very eyes in
the coils of mighty serpents ; our mental climate
lacks such episodes, our imagination is temperate,
even in dreams there does not happen to us what
former peoples saw waking. But should we not
rejoice at this change, even granted that artists
are essentially spoiled by the disappearance of the
tropical culture and find us non-artists a little too
timid ? In so far artists are certainly right to deny
"progress," for indeed it is doubtful whether the |
last three thousand years show an advance in the
arts. In the same way, a metaphysical philosopher
like Schopenhauer would have no cause to acknow-
ledge progress with a regard to metaphysical philo-
sophy and religion if he glanced back over the last
four thousand years. For us, however, the existence
even of the temperate zones of culture is progress.



237.

Renaissance and Reformation. — The
Italian Renaissance contained within itself all thei
positive forces to which we owe modern culture.



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 221

Such were the liberation of thought, the disregard
of authorities, the triumph of education over the
darkness of tradition, enthusiasm for science and
the scientific past of mankind, the unfettering of
the Individual, an ardour for truthfulness and a
dislike of delusion and mere effect (which ardour
blazed forth in an entire company of artistic charac-
ters, who with the greatest moral purity required
from themselves perfection in their works, and
nothing but perfection) ; yes, the Renaissance
had positive forces, which have, as yet, never
become so mighty again in our modern culture.
It was the Golden Age of the last thousand years,
in spite of all its blemishes and vices. On the
other hand, the German Reformation stands out as
an energetic protest of antiquated spirits, who were
by no means tired of mediaeval views of life, and
who received the signs of its dissolution, the extra-
ordinary flatness and alienation of the religious
life, with deep dejection instead of with the
rejoicing that would have been seemly. With
their northern strength and stiff-neckedness they
threw mankind back again, brought about the
counter-reformation, that is, a Catholic Christianity
of self-defence, with all the violences of a state of
siege, and delayed for two or three centuries the
complete awakening and mastery of the sciences ;
just as they probably made for ever impossible
the complete inter-growth of the antique and the
modern spirit. The great task of the Renaissance
could not be brought to a termination, this was
prevented by the protest of the contemporary
backward German spirit (which, for its salvation,



222



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



had had sufficient sense in the Middle Ages to
cross the Alps again and again). It was the
chance of an extraordinary constellation of politics
that Luther was preserved, and that his protest
gained strength, for the Emperor protected him in
order to employ him as a weapon against the Pope,
and in the same way he was secretly favoured
by the Pope in order to use the Protestant princes
as a counter-weight against the Emperor. With-
out this curious counter-play of intentions, Luther
would have been burnt like Huss, — and the
morning sun of enlightenment would probably
have risen somewhat earlier, and with a splendour
more beauteous than we can now imagine.



238.

Justice against the Becoming God. —
When the entire history of culture unfolds itself to
our gaze, as a confusion of evil and noble, of true
and false ideas, and we feel almost seasick at the
sight of these tumultuous waves, we then under-
stand what comfort resides in the conception of a
becoming God. This Deity is unveiled ever more
and more throughout the changes and fortunes of
mankind ; it is not all blind mechanism, a senseless
and aimless confusion of forces. The deification
of the process of being is a metaphysical outlook,
seen as from a lighthouse overlooking the sea of
history, in which a far-too historical generation of
scholars found their comfort. This must not
arouse anger, however erroneous the view may be.
Only those who, like Schopenhauer, deny develop-



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 223

ment also feel none of the misery of this historical
wave, and therefore, because they know nothing
of that becoming God and the need of His supposi-
tion, they should in justice withhold their scorn.



239-

The Fruits According to their Seasons.
— Every better future that is desired for mankind
is necessarily in many respects also a worse
future, for it is foolishness to suppose that a
new, higher grade of humanity will combine in
itself all the good points of former grades, and
must produce, for instance, the highest form
of art. Rather has every season its own
advantages and charms, which exclude those of
the other seasons. That which has grown out
of religion and in its neighbourhood cannot grow
again if this has been destroyed ; at the most,
straggling and belated off-shoots may lead to
deception on that point, like the occasional out-
breaks of remembrance of the old art, a condition
that probably betrays the feeling of loss and
deprivation, but which is no proof of the power
from which a new art might be born.

240.

The Increasing Severity of the World.
— The higher culture an individual attains, the
less field there is left for mockery and scorn.
Voltaire thanked Heaven from his heart for the
invention of marriage and the Church, by which



224 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

it had so well provided for our cheer. But he
and his time, and before him the sixteenth
century, had exhausted their ridicule on this
theme ; everything that is now made fun of on
this theme is out of date, and above all too cheap
to tempt a purchaser. Causes are now inquired
after ; ours is an age of seriousness. Who cares
now to discern, laughingly, the difference between
reality and pretentious sham, between that which
man is and that which he wishes to represent ;
the feeling of this contrast has quite a different
effect if we seek reasons. The more thoroughly
any one understands life, the less he will mock,
though finally, perhaps, he will mock at the
" thoroughness of his understanding."



241.

The Genius of Culture. — If any one wished?
to imagine a genius of culture, what would it
be like ? It handles as its tools falsehood, force,
and thoughtless selfishness so surely that it
could only be called an evil, demoniacal being;
but its aims, which are occasionally transparent,
are great and good. It is a centaur, half-beast,
half-man, and, in addition, has angel's wings
upon its head.

242.

The Miracle-Education. — Interest in Edu-
cation will acquire great strength only from
the moment when belief in a God and His care
is renounced, just as the art of healing could



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 22^

only flourish when the belief in miracle-cures
ceased. So far, however, there is universal belief
in the miracle-education ; out of the greatest
disorder and confusion of aims and unfavourable-
ness of conditions, the most fertile and mighty-
men have been seen to grow ; could this happen
naturally ? Soon these cases will be more closely
looked into, more carefully examined ; but
miracles will never be discovered. In similar
circumstances countless persons perish constantly ;
the few saved have, therefore, usually grown
stronger, because they endured these bad con-
ditions by virtue of an inexhaustible inborn
strength, and this strength they had also exercised
and increased by fighting against these circum-
stances ; thus the miracle is explained. An
education that no longer believes in miracles
must pay attention to three things : first, how
much energy is inherited ? secondly, by what
means can new energy be aroused ? thirdly, how
can the individual be adapted to so many and
manifold claims of culture without being dis-
quieted and destroying his personality, — in
short, how can the individual be initiated into the
counterpoint of private and public culture, how
can he lead the melody and at the same time
accompany it?

243.

The Future of the Physician. — There
is now no profession which would admit of such
an enhancement as that of the physician ; that
is, after the spiritual physicians the so-called

VOL. I. P



226 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.




theirV



pastors, are no longer allowed to practise their
conjuring tricks to public applause, and a
cultured person gets out of their way. The
highest mental development of a physician has
not yet been reached, even if he understands
the best and newest methods, is practised in
them, and knows how to draw those rapid
conclusions from effects to causes for which
the diagnostics are celebrated ; besides this, he
must possess a gift of eloquence that adapts
itself to every individual and draws his heart out
of his body; a manliness, the sight of which alone
drives away all despondency (the canker of all
sick people), the tact and suppleness of a
diplomatist in negotiations between such as have
need of joy for their recovery and such as, for
reasons of health, must (and can) give joy ; the
acuteness of a detective and an attorney to
divine the secrets of a soul without betraying
them, — in short, a good physician now has need
of all the artifices and artistic privileges of every
other professional class. Thus equipped, he is
then ready to be a benefactor to the whole o{.
society, by increasing good works, mental joys
and fertility, by preventing evil thoughts, projects
and villainies (the evil source of which is so
often the belly), by the restoration of a mental
and physical aristocracy (as a maker and hinderer
of marriages), by judiciously checking all so-
called soul-torments and pricks of conscience
Thus from a " medicine man " he becomes
saviour, and yet need work no miracle, neither
is he obliged to let himself be crucified.



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 22/
244.

In the Neighbourhood of Insanity. —
The sum of sensations, knowledge and ex-
periences, the whole burden of culture, therefore,
has become so great that an overstraining of
nerves and powers of thought is a common
danger, indeed the cultivated classes of European
countries are throughout neurotic, and almost
every one of their great families is on the verge
of insanity in one of their branches. True, health
is now sought in every possible way ; but in
the main a diminution of that tension of feeling,
of that oppressive burden of culture, is needful,
which, even though it might be bought at a
heavy sacrifice, would at least give us room for
the great hope of a new Renaissance. To
Christianity, to the philosophers, poets, and
musicians we owe an abundance of deeply
emotional sensations ; in order that these may
not get beyond our control we must invoke the
spirit of science, which on the whole makes us
somewhat colder and more sceptical, and in
particular cools the faith in final and absolute
truths; it is chiefly through Christianity that
it has grown so wild.

245.

The Bell-founding of Culture. — Culture
has been made like a bell, within a covering of
coarser, commoner material, falsehood, violence,
the boundless extension of every individual " I,"



228 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



^



of every separate people — this was the covering.
Is it time to take it off? Has the liquid set,
have the good and useful impulses, the habits
of the nobler nature become so certain and so ■{
general that they no longer require to lean on
metaphysics and the errors of religion, no longer
have need of hardnesses and violence as powerful fll
bonds between man and man, people and people ?
No sign from any God can any longer help us
to answer this question ; our own insight must |i I
decide. The earthly rule of man must be taken " ' <
in hand by man himself, his " omniscience " must
watch over the further fate of culture with a
sharp eye.

246.

The Cyclopes of Culture. — Whoever has
seen those furrowed basins which once contained
glaciers, will hardly deem it possible that a time
will come when the same spot will be a valley
of woods and meadows and streams. It is the
same in the history of mankind ; the wildest m I
forces break the way, destructively at first,
but their activity was nevertheless necessary in
order that later on a milder civilisation might  I
build up its house These terrible energies —
that which is called Evil — are the cyclopic archi-
tects and road-makers of humanity.



247.

The Circulation of Humanity. — It
possible that all humanity is only a phase of




SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 229

development of a certain species of animal of
limited duration. Man may have grown out
of the ape and will return to the ape again,*
without anybody taking an interest in the ending
of this curious comedy. Just as with the decline
of Roman civilisation and its most important
cause, the spread of Christianity, there was a
general uglification of man within the Roman
Empire, so, through the eventual decline of general
culture, there might result a far greater uglification
and finally an animalising of man till he reached
the ape. But just because we are able to face
this prospect, we shall perhaps be able to avert
such an end.

248.

The Consoling Speech of a Desperate
Advance. — Our age gives the impression of an
intermediate condition ; the old ways of regarding
the world, the old cultures still partially exist,
the new are not yet sure and customary and
hence are without decision and consistency. It
appears as if everything would become chaotic,
as if the old were being lost, the new worthless
and ever becoming weaker. But this is what the
soldier feels who is learning to march ; for a time
he is more uncertain and awkward, because his
muscles are moved sometimes according to the
old system and sometimes according to the new,
and neither gains a decisive victory. We waver,

* This may remind one of Gobineau's more jocular
saying : " Nous ne descendons pas du singe, mats nous y
allons:'—]. M. K,



230 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

but it is necessary not to lose courage and give
up what we have newly gained. Moreover, we
cannot go back to the old, we have burnt our
boats ; there remains nothing but to be brave
whatever happen. — March ahead^ only get
forward ! Perhaps our behaviour looks like
progress ; but if not, then the words of Frederick
the Great may also be applied to us, and indeed
as a consolation : " Ah^ mon cher Sulzer, vous ne
connaissez pas assez cette race maudite^ d laquelle
nous appartenons,"

249.

Suffering from Past Culture. — Whoever
has solved the problem of culture suffers from a
feeling similar to that of one who has inherited
unjustly-gotten riches, or of a prince who reigns
thanks to the violence of his ancestors. He
thinks of their origin with grief and is often
ashamed, often irritable. The whole sum of
strength, joy, vigour, which he devotes to his
possessions, is often balanced by a deep weariness,
he cannot forget their origin. He looks despond-
ingly at the future ; he knows well that his
successors will suffer from the past as he does.

250.

Manners. — Good manners disappear in pro-
portion as the influence of a Court and an exclusive
aristocracy lessens ; this decrease can be plainly
observed from decade to decade by those who have
an eye for public behaviour, which grows visibly



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 23 1

more vulgar. No one any longer knows how to
court and flatter intelligently; hence arises the
ludicrous fact that in cases where we must render
actual homage (to a great statesman or artist, for
instance), the words of deepest feeling, of simple,
peasant-like honesty, have to be borrowed, owing
to the embarrassment resulting from the lack
of grace and wit. Thus the public ceremonious
meeting of men appears ever more clumsy, but
more full of feeling and honesty without really
being so. But must there always be a decline in
manners ? It appears to me, rather, that manners
take a deep curve and that we are approaching
their lowest point. When society has become sure
of its intentions and principles, so that they have
a moulding effect (the manners we have learnt
from former moulding conditions are now inherited
and always more weakly learnt), there will then
be company manners, gestures and social ex-
pressions, which must appear as necessary and
simply natural because they are intentions and
principles. The better division of time and work,
the gymnastic exercise transformed into the ac-
companiment of all beautiful leisure, increased and
severer meditation, which brings wisdom and
suppleness even to the body, will bring all this
in its train. Here, indeed, we might think with a
smile of our scholars, and consider whether, as a
matter of fact, they who wish to be regarded as the
forerunners of that new culture are distinguished
by their better manners ? This is hardly the
case ; although their spirit may be willing enough
their flesh is weak. The past of culture is still too



232



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



powerful in their muscles, they still stand in a fettered
position, and are half worldly priests and half de-
pendent educators of the upper classes, and besides
this they have been rendered crippled and life-
less by the pedantry of science and by antiquated,
spiritless methods. In any case, therefore, they
are physically, and often three-fourths mentally,
still the courtiers of an old, even antiquated
culture, and as such are themselves antiquated;
the new spirit that occasionally inhabits these old
dwellings often serves only to make them more
uncertain and frightened. In them there dwell
the ghosts of the past as well as the ghosts of the
future ; what wonder if they do not wear the best
expression or show the most pleasing behaviour?



251.

The Future of Science. — To him who
works and seeks in her, Science gives much
pleasure, — to him who learns her facts, very little.
But as all important truths of science must gradu-
ally become commonplace and everyday matters,
even this small amount of pleasure ceases, just as
we have long ceased to take pleasure in learning
the admirable multiplication table. Now if Science
goes on giving less pleasure in herself, and always
takes more pleasure in throwing suspicion on the
consolations of metaphysics, religion and art, that
greatest of all sources of pleasure, to which
mankind owes almost its whole humanity, becomes
impoverished. Therefore a higher culture must
^ive man a double brain, two brain -chambers, so



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 233

to speak, one to feel science and the other to feel
non-science, which can lie side by side, without
confusion, divisible, exclusive ; this is a necessity
of health. In one part lies the source of strength,
in the other lies the regulator ; it must be heated
with illusions, onesidednesses, passions ; and the
malicious and dangerous consequences of over-
heating must be averted by the help of conscious
Science. If this necessity of the higher culture is not
satisfied, the further course of human development
can almost certainly be foretold : the interest in
what is true ceases as it guarantees less pleasure ;
illusion, error, and imagination reconquer step by
step the ancient territory, because they are
united to pleasure ; the ruin of science : the
relapse into barbarism is the next result ; mankind
must begin to weave its web afresh after having,
like Penelope, destroyed it during the night. But
who will assure us that it will always find the
necessary strength for this ?



252.

The Pleasure in Discernment. — Why is
discernment, that essence of the searcher and the
philosopher, connected with pleasure? Firstly,
and above all, because thereby we become con-
scious of our strength, for the same reason that
gymnastic exercises, even without spectators, are
enjoyable. Secondly, because in the course of
knowledge we surpass older ideas and their re-
presentatives, and become, or believe ourselves to
be, conquerors. Thirdly, because even a very



234' HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

little new knowledge exalts us above every one,
and makes us feel we are the only ones who
know the subject aright. These are the three most
important reasons of the pleasure, but there are
many others, according to the nature of the dis-
cerner. A not inconsiderable index of such is
given, where no one would look for it, in a passage
of my parenetic work on Schopenhauer,* with the
arrangement of which every experienced servant
of knowledge may be satisfied, even though he
might wish to dispense with the ironical touch
that seems to pervade those pages. For if it be
true that for the making of a scholar " a number
of very human impulses and desires must be
thrown together," that the scholar is indeed a
very noble but not a pure metal, and " consists of
a confused blending of very different impulses and
attractions," the same thing may be said equally
of the making and nature of the artist, the phil-
osopher and the moral genius — and whatever
glorified great names there may be in that list.
Everything human deserves ironical consideration
with respect to its origin, — therefore irony is so
superfluous in the world.

253.

Fidelity as a Proof of Validity. — It is a'
perfect sign of a sound theory if during forty
years its originator does not mistrust it ; but I

* This refers to his essay, " Schopenhauer as Educator,"
in Thoughts Out of Season, vol. ii. of the English edition. —
J. M. K.



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 235

maintain that there has never yet been a philo-
sopher who has not eventually deprecated the
philosophy of his youth. Perhaps, however, he
has not spoken publicly of this change of opinion,
for reasons of ambition, or, what is more probable
in noble natures, out of delicate consideration for
his adherents.

254.

The Increase of what is Interesting. —
In the course of higher education everything
becomes interesting to man, he knows how to
find the instructive side of a thing quickly and to
put his finger on the place where it can fill up a
gap in his ideas, or where it may verify a thought.
Through this boredom disappears more and more,
and so does excessive excitability of temperament.
Finally he moves among men like a botanist
among plants, and looks upon himself as a
phenomenon, which only greatly excites his dis-
cerning instinct.

255

The Superstition of the Simultaneous. —
Simultaneous things hold together, it is said. A
relative dies far away, and at the same time we
dream about him, — Consequently ! But countless
relatives die and we do not dream about them.
It is like shipwrecked people who make vows ;
afterwards, in the temples, we do not see the votive
tablets of those who perished. A man dies, an owl
hoots, a clock stops, all at one hour of the night,
- — must there not be some connection ? Such an



236 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

intimacy with nature as this supposition implies
is flattering to mankind. This species of super-
stition is found again in a refined form in historians
and delineators of culture, who usually have a kind
of hydrophobic horror of all that senseless mixture,
in which individual and national life is so rich.



256.

Action and not Knowledge Exercised by
Science. — The value of strictly pursuing science
for a time does not lie precisely in its results, for
these, in proportion to the ocean of what is worth
knowing, are but an infinitesimally small drop.
But it gives an additional energy, decisiveness,
and toughness of endurance ; it teaches how to
attain an aim suitably. In so far it is very valu-
able, with a view to all that is done later on, to
have once been a scientific man.

257.

The Youthful Charm of Science. — The
search for truth still retains the charm of being
in strong contrast to gray and now tiresome
error ; but this charm is gradually disappearing.
It is true we still live in the youthful age of
science and are accustomed to follow truth as a
lovely girl ; but how will it be when one day she
becomes an elderly, ill-tempered looking woman ?
In almost all sciences the fundamental knowledge
is either found in earliest times or is still being
sought; what a different attraction this exerts



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 237

compared to that time when everything essential
has been found and there only remains for the
seeker a scanty gleaning (which sensation may be
learnt in several historical disciplines).

258.

The Statue of Humanity. — The genius of
culture fares as did Cellini when his statue of
Perseus was being cast ; the molten mass threat-
ened to run short, but it had to suffice, so he
flung in his plates and dishes, and whatever else
his hands fell upon. In the same way genius
flings in errors, vices, hopes, ravings, and other
things of baser as well as of nobler metal, for the
statue of humanity must emerge and be finished ;
what does it matter if commoner material is used
here and there?

259.

A Male Culture. — The Greek culture of the
classic age is a male culture. As far as women
are concerned, Pericles expresses everything in
the funeral speech : " They are best when they
are as little spoken of as possible amongst men."
The erotic relation of men to youths was the
necessary and sole preparation, to a degree un-
attainable to our comprehension, of all manly
education (pretty much as for a long time all
higher education of women was only attainable
through love and marriage). All idealism of the
strength of the Greek nature threw itself into that
relation, and it is probable that never since have
young men been treated so attentively, so lovingly,



238



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



SO entirely with a view to their welfare {virtus) as'
in the fifth and sixth centuries B.C. — according to
the beautiful saying of Holderlin : " denn liebend
giebt der Sterbliche vom Besten." * The higher the
light in which this relation was regarded, the lower
sank intercourse with woman ; nothing else was
taken into consideration than the production of^
children and lust ; there was no intellectual
intercourse, not even real love-making. If it be
further remembered that women were even ex-
cluded from contests and spectacles of every
description, there only remain the religious cults
as their sole higher occupation. For although in
the tragedies Electra and Antigone were repre-
sented, this was only tolerated in art, but not
liked in real life, — ^just as now we cannot endure
anything pathetic in life but like it in art. The
women had no other mission than to produce
beautiful, strong bodies, in which the father's i
character lived on as unbrokenly as possible, and'
therewith to counteract the increasing nerve-
tension of such a highly developed culture. Thisj
kept the Greek culture young for a relatively long;
time; for in the Greek mothers the Greek genius <
always returned to nature

260.

The Prejudice in Favour of Greatness.
— It is clear that men overvalue everything great



* For it is when loving that mortal man gives of his
best.— J. M. K.



I



L



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 239

and prominent. This arises from the conscious or
unconscious idea that they deem it very useful
when one person throws all his strength into one
thing and makes himself into a monstrous organ.
Assuredly, an equal development of all his powers
is more useful and happier for man ; for every
talent is a vampire which sucks blood and strength
from other powers, and an exaggerated production
can drive the most gifted almost to madness.
Within the circle of the arts, too, extreme natures
excite far too much attention ; but a much lower
culture is necessary to be captivated by them.
Men submit from habit to everything that seeks
power.

261.

The Tyrants of the Mind. — It is only where
the ray of myth falls that the life of the Greeks
shines ; otherwise it is gloomy. The Greek philo-
sophers are now robbing themselves of this myth ;
is it not as if they wished to quit the sunshine for
shadow and gloom ? Yet no plant avoids the
light ; and, as a matter of fact, those philosophers
were only seeking a brighter sun; the myth ^s
not pure enoug^h, not shin i ng enough for them .
They found this light in their knowledge, in that
which each of them called his " truth." But in
those times knowledge shone with a greater glory ;
it was still young and knew but little of all the
difficulties and dangers of its path ; it could still
hope to reach in one single bound the central point
of all being, and from thence to solve the riddle of
the world. These philosophers had a firm belief in



240



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



themselves and their " truth," and with it they over-
threw all their neighbours and predecessors ; each
one was a warlike, violent tyrant. The happiness in
believing themselves the possessors of truth was per-
haps never greater in the world, but neither were the
hardness, the arrogance, and the tyranny and evil
of such a belief. The y were tyrants, th ey were
that, therefore, which every Greek want ed to be,
a nd which every one was if he w as able. Perhaps
Solon alone is an exception ; heTellsTli his poems
how he disdained personal tyranny. But he did
it for love of his works, of his law-giving ; and
to be a law-giver is a sublimated form of tyranny,
Parmenides also made laws. Pythagoras and
Empedocles probably did the same ; Anaximander
founded a city. Plato was the incarnate wish to
become the greatest philosophic law-giver and
founder of States ; he appears to have suffered
terribly over the non-fulfilment of his nature, and
towards his end his soul was filled with the bitterest
gall. The more the Greek philosophers lost in
power the more they suffered inwardly from this
bitterness and malice ; when the various sects fought
for their truths in the street, then first were the
souls of these wooers of truth completely clogged
through envy and spleen ; the tyrannical element
then raged like poison within their bodies. These
many petty tyrants would have liked to devour
each other ; there survived not a single spark of love
and very little joy in their own knowledge. The
saying that tyrants are generally murdered and that
their descendants are short-lived, is true also of the
tyrants of the mind. Their history is short and



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 241

violent, and their after-effects break off suddenly.
It may be said of almost all great Hellenes that
they appear to have come too late : it~~was~1;bu^
__with.^Eschylus, with Pindar, with Dpmo?ithpnen, -mth
T hucydides : o ne generation — and then it is passed
for ever. That is the stormy and __disrnal^IemeniE
J n Greek history. We now, it is true, admire the
gospel of the tortoises. To think historically is
almost the same thing now as if in all ages history
had been made according to the theory " The
smallest possible amount in the longest possible
time ! " Oh ! how quickly Greek history runs on !
Since then life has never been so extravagant — so
unbounded. I cannot persuade myself that the
history of the Greeks' faWxywed-thztmitural course
for w hich it is so celebrated. They were much too
variously gifted to be gradual in the orderly man-
nS^pftlie tortoise when running a race with Achilles,
and that is called natural development. The
Greeks went rapidly forward, but equally rapidly
downwardsj the movement of the whole machine
is. so intensified that a single stone thrown amid
its- wheels was sufficient to break it. Such a stone^
for instance, was Socrates ; the hitherto so wonder-
fulty"regular, although certainly too rapid, develop-
ment of the philosophical science was destroyed iri .
one nighty It is no idle question whether Plato,
had he remained free from the Socratic charm,"
would not have discovered a still higher type of the
.philosophic man, which type is for ever lost to us.
We look into the ages before him as into a sculptor's
workshop of such types. The fifth and sixth
centuries B.C. seemed to promise something more

VOL. I. Q



i.



242 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and. higher ev^n than they producgd ; they stopped ,
short at promising and announcingr 'And
there is hardly a greater-lnssLJ:haJilhelIos§,of a type,
of a new, hitherto undiscovered highest possibility
oJ^hefhiivsophicHfe.-Y.VQXi of the older type the!

,-gr-eater number are hadly transmitted ; it seems to
me that all philosophers, from Thales to Democritus,
are remarkably difficult to recognise, but whoever
succeeds in imitating these figures walks amongst
specimens of the mightiest and purest type. This
ability is certainly rare, it was even absent in
those later Greeks, who occupied themselves w^h
theTcnowledge of the older philosophy ; Aristotle,"

"Especially, hardly seems to have had eyes in his
head when he stands before these great ones. And
thus it appears as if these splendid philosophers
had lived in vain, or as if they had only been in-
tended to prepare the quarrelsome and talkative
followers of the Socratic schools. As I have
said, here is a gap, a break in development ; some
great misfortune must have happened, and the only
statue which might have revealed the meaning and
purpose of that great artistic training was either
broken or unsuccessful ; what actually happened
has remained for ever a secret of the workshop.

That which happened amongst the Greeks —
namely, that every great thinker who belie ved him -
self to" be m_ possession of We.' 'ahsqlute _ truth
became a tyrant, so that even the mental history of

the Greel<s acquired that violent, hasty anddanger-
ou5-c h aTacter"sTiowh" by their Apolitical history, — this
type of event was not therewith exhausted, much
that is similar has happened even in more modern



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 243

times, although gradually becoming rarer and now
but seldom showing the pure, naive conscience of
the Greek philosophers. For on the whole, oppo-
sition doctrines and scepticism now speak too
powerfully, too loudly. The period of mental
tyranny is past. It is true that in the spheres of
higher culture there must always be a supremacy,
but henceforth this supremacy lies in the hands of
the oligarchs of the mind. In spite of local and
political separation they form a cohesive society,
whose members recognise and acknowledge each
other, whatever public opinion and the verdicts of
review and newspaper writers who influence the
masses may circulate in favour of or against them.
Mental superiority, which formerly divided and
embittered, nowadays generally unites ; how could
the separate individuals assert themselves and swim
through life on their own course, against all currents,
if they did not see others like them living here and
there under similar conditions, and grasped their
hands,in the struggle as much against the ochlocratic
character of the half mind and half culture as
against the occasional attempts to establish a
tyranny with the help of the masses ? Oligarchs
are necessary to each other, they are each other's
best joy, they understand their signs, but each is
^nevertheless free, he fights and conquers in his
)lace and perishes rather than submit.

262.

Homer. — The greatest fact in Greek culture
;mains this, that Homer became so early Pan-



244 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Helleiijp, All mental and human freedom to
which the Greeks attained is traceable to this
fact. At the same time it has actually been fatal

tq_Greek cuUure;4br-j Jom€ r4€¥ej4e driir5smH.^^^ ^^
he ce ntralised, and dissolved the more sefiouT
i nstincts o f independence. From jLiriie__to -tiaie

there_arQsel_£cQm the dep ths of_Hellenism an

opposition to Homer ; but he always rem ained
vict orious . All great me ntal JB^w^^IL have, an
oppressing effect as well a s a libera ting one ; but
it certainly makes a difference \yhether it is Homer
or_lhe__Biblfi or. Science that tyrannises over
mankind.

263.

Talents. — In such a highly developed
humanity as the present, each individual naturally
has access to many talents. Each has an inborn
talent^ but only in a few is that degree of tough-
ness, endurance, and energy born and trained that
he really becomes a talent, becomes what he w,-
that is, that he discharges it in works and actions.

264.

The Witty Person either Overvalued
OR Undervalued. — Unscientific but talented
people value every mark of intelligence, whether
it be on a true or a false track ; above all, they
want the person with whom they have inter-
course to entertain them with his wit, to spur
them on, to inflame them, to carry them away in
seriousness and play, and in any case to be a



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 245

powerful amulet to protect them against boredom.
Scientific natures, on the other hand, know that
the gift of possessing all manner of notions should
be strictly controlled by the scientific spirit: it is
not that which shines, deludes and excites, but
the often insignificant truth that is the fruit which
he knows how to shake down from the tree of
knowledge. Like Aristotle, he is not permitted
to make any distinction between the " bores " and
the " wits," his dcsmon leads him through the desert
as well as through tropical vegetation, in order
that he may only take pleasure in the really
actual, tangible, true. In insignificant scholars
this produces a general disdain and suspicion of
cleverness, and, on the other hand, clever people
frequently have an aversion to science, as have,
for instance, almost all artists.

265.

Sense in School. — School has no task more
important than to teach strict thought, cautious
judgment, and logical conclusions, hence it must
pay no attention to what hinders these operations,
such as religion, for instance. It can count on the
fact that human vagueness, custom, and need will
later on unstring the bow of all-too-severe thought.
But so long as its influence lasts it should enforce
that which is the essential and distinguishing point
in man : " Sense and Science, the very highest
power of man" — as Goethe judges. The great
natural philosopher, Von Baer, thinks that the
superiority of all Europeans, when compared to



246 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Asiatics, lies in the trained capability of giving
reasons for that which they believe, of which the
latter are utterly incapable. Europe went to the
school of logical and critical thought, Asia still
fails to know how to distinguish between truth and
fiction, and is not conscious whether its convictions
spring from individual observation and systematic
thought or from imagination. Sense in the school
has made Europe what it is ; in the Middle Ages
it was on the road to become once more a part
and dependent of Asia, — forfeiting, therefore, the
scientific mind which it owed to the Greeks.



266.

The Undervalued Effect of Public-
School Teaching. — The value of a public
school is seldom sought in those things which are
really learnt there and are carried away never to
be lost, but in those things which are learnt and
which the pupil only acquires against his will, in
order to get rid of them again as soon as possible.
Every educated person acknowledges that the
reading of the classics, as now practised, is a
monstrous proceeding carried on before young
people are ripe enough for it by teachers who
with every word, often by their appearance alone,
throw a mildew on a good author. But therein
lies the value, generally unrecognised, of these
teachers who speak the abstract language of the
higher culture, which, though dry and difficult to
understand, is yet a sort of higher gymnastics of the
brain ; and there is value in the constant recurrence



CC ^H



I



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 247

in their language of ideas, artistic expressions,
methods and allusions which the young people
hardly ever hear in the conversations of their
relatives and in the street. Even if the pupils
only hear, their intellect is involuntarily trained
to a scientific mode of regarding things. It is
not possible to emerge from this discipline entirely
untouched by its abstract character, and to remain
a simple child of nature.

Learning many Languages. — The learning
of many languages fills the memory with words
instead of with facts and thoughts, and this is a
vessel which, with every person, can only contain
a certain limited amount of contents. Therefore
the learning of many languages is injurious, inas-
much as it arouses a belief in possessing dexterity
and, as a matter of fact, it lends a kind of delusive
importance to social intercourse. It is also indirectly
injurious in that it opposes the acquirement of
solid knowledge and the intention to win the
respect of men in an honest way. Finally, it is
the axe which is laid to the root of a delicate
sense of language in our mother-tongue, which
thereby is incurably injured and destroyed. The
two nations which produced the greatest stylists,
the Greeks and the French, learned no foreign
languages. But as human intercourse must always
grow more cosmopolitan, and as, for instance, a
good merchant in London must now be able to
read and write eight languages, the learning of



24$



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



many tongues has certainly become a necessary
evil ; but which, when finally carried to an
extreme, will compel mankind to find a remedy,
and in some far-off future there will be a new
language, used at first as a language of commerce,
then as a language of intellectual intercourse
generally, then for all, as surely as some time
or other there will be aviation. Why else should
philology have studied the laws of languages for
a whole century, and have estimated the necessary,
the valuable, and the successful portion of each
separate language?

268.

The War History of the Individual. — ^
In a single human life that passes through many
styles of culture we find that struggle condensed
which would otherwise have been played out
between two generations, between father and son ;
the closeness of the relationship sharpens this
struggle, because each party ruthlessly drags in
the familiar inward nature of the other party ; and
thus this struggle in the single individual becomes
most embittered \ here every new phase disregards
the earlier ones with cruel injustice and mis-
understanding of their means and aims.



269.

A Quarter of an Hour Earlier. — A man
is found occasionally whose views are beyond his
time, but only to such an extent that he anticipates
the common views of the next decade. He



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 249

possesses public opinion before it is public ; that
is, he has fallen into the arms of a view that
deserves to be trivial a quarter of an hour sooner
than other people. But his fame is usually far
noisier than the fame of those who are really-
great and prominent



270.

The Art of Reading. — Every strong ten-
dency is one-sided ; it approaches the aim of the
straight line and, like this, is exclusive, that is, it
does not touch many other aims, as do weak
parties and natures in their wave-like rolling to-
and-fro ; it must also be forgiven to philologists
that they are one-sided. The restoration and
keeping pure of texts, besides their explana-
tion, carried on in common for hundreds of
years, has finally enabled the right metliods
to be found ; the whole of the Middle Ages was
absolutely incapable of a strictly philological
explanation, that is, of the simple desire to com-
prehend what an author says — it was an achieve-
ment, finding these methods, let it not be under-
valued ! Through this all science first acquired
continuity and steadiness, so that the art of
reading rightly, which is called philology, attained
its summit.

271.

The Art of Reasoning. — The greatest
advance that men have made lies in their



250



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



acquisition of the art to reason rightly. It is
not so very natural, as Schopenhauer supposes
when he says, " All are capable of reasoning,
but few of judging," it is learnt late and has
not yet attained supremacy. False conclusions
are the rule in older ages ; and the mythologies
of all peoples, their magic and their superstition,
their religious cult and their law are the inex-
haustible sources of proof of this theory.



272.

Phases of Individual Culture. — The
strength and weakness of mental productiveness
depend far less on inherited talents than on the
accompanying amount of elasticity. Most edu-
cated young people of thirty turn round at this
solstice of their lives and are afterwards dis-
inclined for new mental turnings. Therefore,
for the salvation of a constantly increasing culture,
a new generation is immediately necessary, which
will not do very much either, for in order to
come up with the father's culture the son must
exhaust almost all the inherited energy which
the father himself possessed at that stage of
life when his son was born ; with the little
addition he gets further on (for as here the
road is being traversed for the second time
progress is a little quicker ; in order to learn
that which the father knew, the son does not
consume quite so much strength). Men of great
elasticity, like Goethe, for instance, get through



I



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 2^1

almost more than four generations in succession
would be capable of; but then they advance
too quickly, so that the rest of mankind only
comes up with them in the next century, and
even then perhaps not completely, because the
exclusiveness of culture and the consecutiveness
of development have been weakened by the
frequent interruptions. Men catch up more
quickly with the ordinary phases of intellectual
culture which has been acquired in the course
of history. Nowadays they begin to acquire
culture as religiously inclined children, and
perhaps about their tenth year these sentiments
attain to their highest point, and are then
changed into weakened forms (pantheism), whilst
they draw near to science ; they entirely pass by
God, immortality, and such-like things, but are
overcome by the witchcraft of a metaphysical
philosophy. Eventually they find even this un-
worthy of belief; art, on the contrary, seems
to vouchsafe more and more, so that for a time
metaphysics is metamorphosed and continues
to exist either as a transition to art or as an
artistically transfiguring temperament. But the
scientific sense grows more imperious and con-
ducts man to natural sciences and history, and
particularly to the severest methods of knowledge,
whilst art has always a milder and less exacting
meaning. All this usually happens within the
first thirty years of a man's life. It is the re-
capitulation of a./>ensum, for which humanity had
laboured perhaps thirty thousand years.



252



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



273-



Retrograded, not Left Behind. — Who-^
ever, in the present day, still derives his develop^
ment from religious sentiments, and perhaps lives
for some length of time afterwards in metaphysics
and art, has assuredly gone back a considerable
distance and begins his race with other modern
men under unfavourable conditions ; he apparently
loses time and space. But because he stays in
those domains where ardour and energy are
liberated and force flows continuously as a volcanic
stream out of an inexhaustible source, he goes
forward all the more quickly as soon as he has
freed himself at the right moment from those
dominators ; his feet are winged, his breast has
learned quieter, longer, and more enduring
breathing. He has only retreated in order to
have sufficient room to leap ; thus something
terrible and threatening may lie in this retrograde
movement.




274.

A Portion of our Ego as an Artistic
Object. — It is a sign of superior culture
consciously to retain and present a true picture
of certain phases of development which commoner
men live through almost thoughtlessly and then
efface from the tablets of their souls : this is a
higher species of the painter's art which only the
few understand. For this it is necessary to
isolate those phases artificially. Historical studies
form the qualification for this painting, for they



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 253

constantly incite us in regard to a portion of
history, a people, or a human life, to imagine
for ourselves a quite distinct horizon of thoughts,
a certain strength of feelings, the prominence of
this or the obscurity of that. Herein consists
the historic sense, that out of given instances
we can quickly reconstruct such systems of
thoughts and feelings, just as we can mentally
reconstruct a temple out of a few pillars and
remains of walls accidentally left standing. The
next result is that we understand our fellow-
men as belonging to distinct systems and re-
presentatives of different cultures — that is, as
necessary, but as changeable ; and, again, that
we can separate portions of our own development
and put them down independently.



275

Cynics and Epicureans. — The cynic re-
cognises the connection between the multiplied
and stronger pains of the more highly cultivated
man and the abundance of requirements ; he
comprehends, therefore, that the multitude of
opinions about what is beautiful, suitable, seemly
and pleasing, must also produce very rich
sources of enjoyment, but also of displeasure.
In accordance with this view he educates himself
backwards, by giving up many of these opinions
and withdrawing from certain demands of culture ;
he thereby gains a feeling of freedom and strength ;
and gradually, when habit has made his manner
of life endurable, his sensations of displeasure



254



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



are, as a matter of fact, rarer and weaker than
those of cultivated people, and approach those
of the domestic animal ; moreover, he experiences
everything with the charm of contrast, and — he
can also scold to his heart's content; so that
thereby he again rises high above the sensation-
range of the animal. The Epicurean has the
same point of view as the cynic ; there is usually
only a difference of temperament between them.
Then the Epicurean makes use of his higher
culture to render himself independent of prevailing
opinions, he raises himself above them, whilst
the cynic only remains negative. He walks,
as it were, in wind-protected, well-sheltered, half-
dark paths, whilst over him, in the wind, the tops
of the trees rustle and show him how violently
agitated is the world out there. The cynic, on
the contrary, goes, as it were, naked into the
rushing of the wind and hardens himself to the
point of insensibility.



276.

Microcosm and Macrocosm of Culture.
— The best discoveries about culture man makes
within himself when he finds two heterogeneous
powers ruling therein. Supposing some one were
living as much in love for the plastic arts or for
music as he was carried away by the spirit of
science, and that he were to regard it as impos-
sible for him to end this contradiction by the
destruction of one and complete liberation of the
other power, there would therefore remain nothing



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 255

for him to do but to erect around himself such
a large edifice of culture that those two powers
might both dwell within it, although at different
ends, whilst between them there dwelt reconciling,
intermediary powers, with predominant strength to
quell, in case of need, the rising conflict. But
such an edifice of culture in the single individual
will bear a great resemblance to the culture
of entire periods, and will afford consecutive
analogical teaching concerning it. For wher-
ever the great architecture of culture manifested
itself it was its mission to compel opposing powers
to agree, by means of an overwhelming accumu-
lation of other less unbearable powers, without
thereby oppressing and fettering them.

277.

Happiness and Culture. — We are moved
at the sight of our childhood's surroundings, — the
arbour, the church with its graves, the pond and
the wood, — all this we see again with pain.
We are seized with pity for ourselves ; for what
have we not passed through since then ! And
everything here is so silent, so eternal, only we
are so changed, so moved ; we even find a few
human beings, on whom Time has sharpened his
teeth no more than on an oak tree, — peasants,
fishermen, woodmen — they are unchanged.
Emotion and self-pity at the sight of lower
culture is the sign of higher culture ; from which
the conclusion may be drawn that happiness has
certainly not been increased by it. Whoever



256



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



wishes to reap happiness and comfort in life
should always avoid higher culture.

278.

The Simile of the Dance. — It must now
be regarded as a decisive sign of great culture if
some one possesses sufficient strength and flexi-
bility to be as pure and strict in discernment as,
in other moments, to be capable of giving poetry,
religion, and metaphysics a hundred paces' start
and then feeling their force and beauty. Such a
position amid two such different demands is very
difficult, for science urges the absolute supremacy
of its methods, and if this insistence is not yielded
to, there arises the other danger of a weak waver-
ing between different impulses. Meanwhile, to
cast a glance, in simile at least, on a solution of
this difficulty, it may be remembered that dancing
is not the same as a dull reeling to and fro
between different impulses. High culture will
resemble a bold dance, — wherefore, as has been
said, there is need of much strength and suppleness.



279.

Of the Relieving of Life. — A primary
way of lightening life is the idealisation of all its
occurrences ; and with the help of painting we
should make it quite clear to ourselves what ideal-
ising means. The painter requires that the spectator
should not observe too closely or too sharply, he
forces him back to a certain distance from whence



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 257

to make his observations ; he is obh'ged to take
for granted a fixed distance of the spectator from
the picture, — he must even suppose an equally
certain amount of sharpness of eye in his
spectator; in such things he must on no account
waver. Every one, therefore, who desires to
idealise his life must not look at it too closely,
and must always keep his gaze at a certain
distance. This was a trick that Goethe, for
instance, understood.

280.

Aggravation as Relief, and Vice Versa.
— Much that makes life more difficult in certain
grades of mankind serves to lighten it in a higher
grade, because such people have become familiar
with greater aggravations of life. The contrary
also happens ; for instance, religion has a double
face, according to whether a man looks up to it
to relieve him of his burden and need, or looks
down upon it as nipon fetters laid on him to
prevent him from soaring too high into the air.

281.

The Higher Culture is Necessarily
Misunderstood. — He who has strung his instru-
ment with only two strings, like the scholars
(who, besides the instinct of knowledge possess
only an acquired religious instinct), does not under-
stand people who can play upon more strings.
It lies in the nature of the higher, many-stringed
culture that it should always be falsely interpreted
by the lower; an example of this is when art



258



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



appears as a disguised form of the religious.
People who are only religious understand even'
science as a searching after the religious senti-
ment, just as deaf mutes do not know what music ;
is, unless it be visible movement.

282.

Lamentation. — It is, perhaps, the advantages
of our epoch that bring with them a backward
movement and an occasional undervaluing of the
vita contemplativa. But it must be acknowledged
that our time is poor in the matter of great I
moralists, that Pascal, Epictetus, Seneca, and
Plutarch are now but little read, that work and)
industry — formerly in the following of the great !
goddess Health — sometimes appear to rage like
a disease. Because time to think and tranquillity ,
in thought are lacking, we no longer ponder over
different views, but content ourselves with hating
them. With the enormous acceleration of life,!
mind and eye grow accustomed to a partial and!
false sight and judgment, and all people are like
travellers whose only acquaintance with countries
and nations is derived from the railway. An
independent and cautious attitude of knowledge
is looked upon almost as a kind of madness ; the i
free spirit is brought into disrepute, chiefly
through scholars, who miss their thoroughness
and ant-like industry in his art of regarding things
and would gladly banish him into one single corner
of science, while it has the different and higher
mission of commanding the battalion rear-guard
of scientific and learned men from an isolated



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 259

position, and showing them the ways and aims
of culture. A song of lamentation such as that
which has just been sung will probably have its
own period, and will cease of its own accord on a
forcible return of the genius of meditation.

283.

The Chief Deficiency of Active People. —
Active people are usually deficient in the higher
activity, I mean individual activity. They are
active as officials, merchants, scholars, that is as
a species, but not as quite distinct separate and
single individuals ; in this respect they are idle.
It is the misfortune of the active that their activity
is almost always a little senseless. For instance,
we must not ask the money-making banker the
reason of his restless activity, it is foolish. The
active roll as the stone rolls, according to the
stupidity of mechanics. All mankind is divided,
as it was at all times and is still, into slaves and
freemen ; for whoever has not two-thirds of his
day for himself is a slave, be he otherwise what-
ever he likes, statesman, merchant, official, or
scholar.

284.

In Favour of the Idle. — As a sign that
the value of a contemplative life has decreased,
scholars now vie with active people in a sort of
hurried enjoyment, so that they appear to value
this mode of enjoying more than that which
really pertains to them, and which, as a matter of
fact, is a far greater enjoyment. Scholars are



26o



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



ashamed of otimn. But there is one noble thing
about idleness and idlers. If idleness is really the
beginning of all vice, it finds itself, therefore, at least
in near neighbourhood of all the virtues ; the idle
man is still a better man than the active. You
do not suppose that in speaking of idleness and
idlers I am alluding to you, you sluggards ?

285.

Modern Unrest. — Modem restlessness in-
creases towards the west, so that Americans look
upon the inhabitants of Europe as altogether
peace-loving and enjoying beings, whilst in reality
they swarm about like wasps and bees. This
restlessness is so great that the higher culture
cannot mature its fruits, it is as if the seasons
followed each other too quickly. For lack of rest
our civilisation is turning into a new barbarism.
At no period have the active, that is, the restless,
been of more importance. One of the necessary
corrections, therefore, which must be undertaken in
the character of humanity is to strengthen the
contemplative element on a large scale. But every
individual who is quiet and steady in heart and
head already has the right to believe that he
possesses not only a good temperament, but also
a generally useful virtue, and even fulfils a higher
mission by the preservation of this virtue.



286.

To what Extent the Active Man is
Lazy. — I believe that every one must have his



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 261

own opinion about everything concerning which
opinions are possible, because he himself is a
peculiar, unique thing, which assumes towards all
other things a new and never hitherto existing
attitude. But idleness, which lies at the bottom
of the active man's soul, prevents him from draw-
ing water out of his own well. Freedom of
opinion is like health ; both are individual, and no
good general conception can be set up of either of
them. That which is necessary for the health of
one individual is the cause of disease in another,
and many means and ways to the freedom of the
spirit are for more highly developed natures the
ways and means to confinement.

287.

Censor Vit^. — Alternations of love and hatred
for a long period distinguish the inward condition
of a man who desires to be free in his judgment
of life ; he does not forget, and bears everything a
grudge, for good and evil. At last, when the
whole tablet of his soul is written full of experi-
ences, he will not hate and despise existence,
neither will he love it, but will regard it sometimes
with a joyful, sometimes with a sorrowful eye, and,
like nature, will be now in a summer and now in
an autumn mood.

288.

The Secondary Result. — Whoever earnestly

desires to be free will therewith and without any

compulsion lose all inclination for faults and vices ;

^ he will also be more rarely overcome by anger and



262



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



vexation. His will desires nothing more urgently
than to discern, and the means to do this, — that is,
the permanent condition in which he is best able
to discern.

289.

The Value of Disease. — The man who is
bed-ridden often perceives that he is usually ill of
his position, business, or society, and through them
has lost all self-possession. He gains this piece
of knowledge from the idleness to which his illness
condemns him.

290.

Sensitiveness in the Country. — If there
are no firm, quiet lines on the horizon of his life, a
species of mountain and forest line, man's inmost
will itself becomes restless, inattentive, and covetous,
as is the nature of a dweller in towns ; he has no
happiness and confers no happiness.



291.

Prudence of the Free Spirits. — Free-
thinkers, those who live by knowledge alone, will
soon attain the supreme aim of their life and their
ultimate position towards society and State, and
will gladly content themselves, for instance, with a
small post or an income that is just sufficient to
enable them to live ; for they will arrange to live
in such a manner that a great change of outward
prosperity, even an overthrow of the political order,
would not cause an overthrow of their life. To
all these things they devote as little energy as



SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 263

possible in order that with their whole accumu-
lated strength, and with a long breath, they may
dive into the element of knowledge. Thus they
can hope to dive deep and be able to see the
bottom. Such a spirit seizes only the point of
an event, he does not care for things in the whole
breadth and prolixity of their folds, for he does not
wish to entangle himself in them. He, too, knows
the weekdays of restraint, of dependence and
servitude. But from time to time there must
dawn for him a Sunday of liberty, otherwise he
could not endure life. It is probable that even his
love for humanity will be prudent and somewhat
short-winded, for he desires to meddle with the
world of inclinations and of blindness only as far
as is necessary for the purpose of knowledge. He
must trust that the genius of justice will say some-
thing for its disciple and protege if accusing voices
were to call him poor in love. In his mode of life
and thought there is a refined heroism, which
scorns to offer itself to the great mob-reverence, as
its coarser brother does, and passes quietly through
and out of the world. Whatever labyrinths it
traverses, beneath whatever rocks its stream has
occasionally worked its way — when it reaches the
light it goes clearly, easily, and almost noiselessly
on its way, and lets the sunshine strike down to
its very bottom.

292.

Forward. — And thus forward upon the path
of wisdom, with a firm step and good confidence !
However you may be situated, serve yourself as a



264



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



source of experience ! Throw off the displeasure
at your nature, forgive yourself your own individu-
ality, for in any case you have in yourself a ladder
with a hundred steps upon which you can mount to
knowledge. The age into which with grief you feel
yourself thrown thinks you happy because of this
good fortune ; it calls out to you that you shall
still have experiences which men of later ages will
perhaps be obliged to forego. Do not despise
the fact of having been religious ; consider fully
how you have had a genuine access to art. Can
you not, with the help of these experiences, follow
immense stretches of former humanity with a
clearer understanding ? Is not that ground which
sometimes displeases you so greatly, that ground
of clouded thought, precisely the one upon which
have grown many of the most glorious fruits of
older civilisations ? You must have loved religion
and art as you loved mother and nurse, — other-
wise you cannot be wise. But you must be able
to see beyond them, to outgrow them ; if you
remain under their ban you do not understand
them. You must also be familiar with history and
that cautious play with the balances : " On the
one hand — on the other hand." Go back, tread-
ing in the footsteps made by mankind in its great
and painful journey through the desert of the past,
and you will learn most surely whither it is that
all later humanity never can or may go again.
And inasmuch as you wish with all your strength
to see in advance how the knots of the future are
tied, your own life acquires the value of an instru-
ment and means of knowledge. It is within your




SIGNS OF HIGHER AND LOWER CULTURE. 265

power to see that all you have experienced, trials,
errors, faults, deceptions, passions, your love and
your hope, shall be merged wholly in your aim.
This aim is to become a necessary chain of culture-
links yourself, and from this necessity to draw a
conclusion as to the necessity in the progress of
general culture. When your sight has become
strong enough to see to the bottom of the dark
well of your nature and your knowledge, it is
possible that in its mirror you may also behold
the far-away visions of future civilisations. Do
you think that such a life with such an aim is too
wearisome, too empty of all that is agreeable ?
Then you have still to learn that no honey is
sweeter than that of knowledge, and that the
overhanging clouds of trouble must be to you as
an udder from which you shall draw milk for your
refreshment. And only when old age approaches
will you rightly perceive how you listened to the
voice of nature, that nature which rules the whole
world through pleasure ; the same life which has
its zenith in age has also its zenith in wisdom, in
that mild sunshine of a constant mental joyful-
ness ; you meet them both, old age and wisdom,
upon one ridge of life, — it was thus intended by
Nature. Then it is time, and no cause for anger,
that the mists of death approach. Towards the
light is your last movement ; a joyful cry of
knowledge is your last sound.


SIXTH DIVISION.
MAN IN SOCIETY.

293.
Well-Meant Dissimulation. — In intercourse
with men a well-meant dissimulation is often
necessary, as if we did not see through the motives
of their actions.

294.

Copies. — We not unfrequently meet with copies
of prominent persons ; and as in the case of
pictures, so also here, the copies please more than
the originals.

295.

The Public Speaker. — One may speak with
the greatest appropriateness, and yet so that every-
body cries out to the contrary, — that is to say,
when one does not speak to everybody.

296.

Want of Confidence. — Want of confidence
among friends is a fault that cannot be censured
without becoming incurable.



11.



268



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



297.

The Art of Giving. — To have to refuse a
gift, merely because it has not been offered in the
right way, provokes animosity against the giver.

298.

The most Dangerous Partisan. — In every
party there is one who, by his far too dogmatic
expression of the party-principles, excites defec-
tion among the others.

299.

Advisers of the Sick. — Whoever gives
advice to a sick person acquires a feeling of
superiority over him, whether the advice be ac-
cepted or rejected. Hence proud and sensitive sick
persons hate advisers more than their sickness.

300.

Double Nature of Equality. — The rage
for equality may so manifest itself that we seek
either to draw all others down to ourselves (by
belittling, disregarding, and tripping up), or our-
selves and all others upwards (by recognition,
assistance, and congratulation).



301.

Against Embarrassment. — The best way
to relieve and calm very embarrassed people is to
give them decided praise.



MAN IN SOCIETY. 269

302.

Preference for Certain Virtues. — We
set no special value on the possession of a virtue
until we perceive that it is entirely lacking in our
adversary.

303.

Why we Contradict. — We often contradict
an opinion when it is really only the tone in
hich it is expressed that is unsympathetic to us.




304.

Confidence and Intimacy. — Whoever pro-
poses to command the intimacy of a person is
usually uncertain of possessing his confidence.
Whoever is sure of a person's confidence attaches
little value to intimacy with him.

305.

The Equilibrium of Friendship. — The
right equilibrium of friendship in our relation to
other men is sometimes restored when we put a
few grains of wrong on our own side of the scales.

306.

The most Dangerous Physicians. — The
most dangerous physicians are those who, like born
actors, imitate the born physician with the perfect
art of imposture.



k



270 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

307.

When Paradoxes are Permissible. — In|
order to interest clever persons in a theory, it is
sometimes only necessary to put it before theraj
in the form of a prodigious paradox.

308.

How Courageous People are Won OverJ
— Courageous people are persuaded to a course of
action by representing it as more dangerous thar
it really is.

309.

Courtesies. — We regard the courtesies showi
us by unpopular persons as offences.

310.

Keeping People Waiting. — A sure way o(
exasperating people and of putting bad thoughts
into their heads is to keep them waiting longj
That makes them immoral.

311.

Against the Confidential. — Persons whc
give us their full confidence think they have
thereby a right to ours. That is a mistake;
people acquire no rights through gifts,

312.

A Mode of Settlement. — It often suffices
to give a person whom we have injured ai
opportunity to make a joke about us to give hii




MAN IN SOCIETY. 2/1

personal satisfaction, and even to make him favour-
ably disposed to us.

313-
The Vanity of the Tongue. — Whether man
conceals his bad qualities and vices, or frankly
acknowledges them, his vanity in either case seeks
its advantage thereby, — only let it be observed
how nicely he distinguishes those from whom he
conceals such qualities from those with whom he
is frank and honest.

314.
Considerate. — To have no wish to offend or
injure any one may as well be the sign of a just
as of a timid nature.

315. '

Requisite for Disputation. — He who can-
not put his thoughts on ice should not enter into
the heat of dispute.

316.

Intercourse and Pretension. — We forget
our pretensions when we are always conscious of
being amongst meritorious people; being alone
implants presumption in us. The young are
pretentious, for they associate with their equals,
who are all ciphers but would fain have a great
significance.

317.

Motives of an Attack. — One does not attack
a person merely to hurt and conquer him, but
perhaps merely to become conscious of one's own
strength.



272



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



318.

Flattery. — Persons who try by means of
flattery to put us off our guard in intercourse
with them, employ a dangerous expedient, hke
a sleeping-draught, which, when it does not send
the patient to sleep, keeps him all the wider
awake.

319.

A Good Letter-Writer. — A person who
does not write books, thinks much, and lives in
unsatisfying society, will usually be a good letter-
writer.

320.

The Ugliest of All. — It may be doubted
whether a person who has travelled much has
found anywhere in the world uglier places than
those to be met with in the human face.

321.

The Sympathetic Ones. — Sympathetic
natures, ever ready to help in misfortune, are
seldom those that participate in joy ; in the
happiness of others they have nothing to occupy
them, they are superfluous, they do not feel them-
selves in possession of their superiority, and hence
readily show their displeasure.



322.

The Relatives of a Suicide. — The relatives
of a suicide take it in ill part that he did not
remain alive out of consideration for their reputation.



MAN IN SOCIETY. 273

323-

Ingratitude Foreseen. — He who makes a
large gift gets no gratitude ; for the recipient is
already overburdened by the acceptance of the gift.

324-
In Dull Society. — Nobody thanks a witty
man for politeness when he puts himself on a par
with a society in which it would not be polite to
show one's wit.

325-
The Presence of Witnesses. — We are
doubly willing to jump into the water after some
one who has fallen in, if there are people present
who have not the courage to do so.

326.

Being Silent. — For both parties in a con-
troversy, the most disagreeable way of retaliating
is to be vexed and silent ; for the aggressor
usually regards the silence as a sign of contempt.

327.
Friends' Secrets. — Few people will not
expose the private affairs of their friends when
at a loss for a subject of conversation.

328.

Humanity. — The humanity of intellectual
celebrities consists in courteously submitting to

VOL. I. S



274



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



unfairness in intercourse with those who are
not celebrated.

329-

The Embarrassed. — People who do not feel
sure of themselves in society seize every oppor-
tunity of publicly showing their superiority to
close friends, for instance by teasing them.

330.

Thanks. — A refined nature is vexed by know-
ing that some one owes it thanks, a coarse nature
by knowing that it owes thanks to some one.

331.

A Sign of Estrangement. — The surest sign'
of the estrangement of the opinions of two persons
is when they both say something ironical to each
other and neither of them feels the irony.

332.

Presumption in Connection with Merit.
— Presumption in connection with merit offends
us even more than presumption in persons devoid
of merit, for merit in itself offends us.



333-

Danger in the Voice. — In conversation we
are sometimes confused by the tone of our own
voice, and misled to make assertions that do not
at all correspond to our opinions,



MAN IN SOCIETY. 275

334.
In Conversation. — Whether in conversation
with others we mostly agree or mostly disagree
with them is a matter of habit ; there is sense in
both cases.

335.
Fear of Our Neighbour. — We are afraid of
the animosity of our neighbour, because we are
apprehensive that he may thereby discover our
secrets.

336.
Distinguishing by Blaming. — Highly re-
spected persons distribute even their blame in
such fashion that they try to distinguish us there-
with. It is intended to remind us of their serious
interest in us. We misunderstand them entirely
when we take their blame literally and protest
against it ; we thereby offend them and estrange
ourselves from them.

337.
Indignation at the Goodwill of Others.
— We are mistaken as to the extent to which we
think we are hated or feared; because, though
we ourselves know very well the extent of our
divergence from a person, tendency, or party, those
others know us only superficially, and can, there-
fore, only hate us superficially. We often meet
with goodwill which is inexplicable to us ; but
when we comprehend it, it shocks us, because it
shows that we are not considered with sufficient
seriousness or importance.



2/6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

338.

Thwarting Vanities. — When two persons ^,
meet whose vanity is equally great, they have
afterwards a bad impression of each other;
because each has been so occupied with the
impression he wished to produce on the other
that the other has made no impression upon him ;
at last it becomes clear to them both that their
efforts have been in vain, and each puts the blame
on the other. fl

339.

Improper Behaviour as a Good Sign. — A
superior mind takes pleasure in the tactlessness,
pretentiousness, and even hostility of ambitious
youths ; it is the vicious habit of fiery horses
which have not yet carried a rider, but, in a short
time, will be so proud to carry one.

340.

When it is Advisable to Suffer Wrong
— It is well to put up with accusations without
refutation, even when they injure us, when the
accuser would see a still greater fault on our part
if we contradicted and perhaps even refuted him
In this way, certainly, a person may always be
wronged and always have right on his side, and
may eventually, with the best conscience in the
world, become the most intolerable tyrant and
tormentor ; and what happens in the individual
may also take place in whole classes of society.



MAN IN SOCIETY. 277

341.

Too Little Honoured. — Very conceited
persons, who have received less consideration than
they expected, attempt for a long time to
deceive themselves and others with regard to it,
and become subtle psychologists in order to make
out that they have been amply honoured. Should
they not attain their aim, should the veil of
deception be torn, they give way to all the greater
fury.

342.

Primitive Conditions Re - echoing in
Speech. — By the manner in which people make
assertions in their intercourse we often recognise
an echo of the times when they were more con-
versant with weapons than anything else ; some-
times they handle their assertions like sharp-
shooters using their arms, sometimes we think we
hear the whizz and clash of swords, and with
some men an assertion crashes down like a stout
cudgel. Women, on the contrary, speak like
beings who for thousands of years have sat at the
loom, plied the needle, or played the child with
children.

343-

The Narrator. — He who gives an account
of something readily betrays whether it is because
the fact interests him, or because he wishes to
excite interest by the narration. In the latter
case he will exaggerate, employ superlatives, and
such like. He then does not usually tell his story



278 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

SO well, because he does not think so much about
his subject as about himself.

344.

The Reciter. — He who recites dramatic
works makes discoveries about his own character;
he finds his voice more natural in certain moods
and scenes than in others, say in the pathetic or
in the scurrilous, while in ordinary life, perhaps,
he has not had the opportunity to exhibit pathos
or scurrility.

345.

A Comedy Scene in Real Life. — Some one
conceives an ingenious idea on a theme in order
to express it in society. Now in a comedy we
should hear and see how he sets all sail for that
point, and tries to land the company at the place
where he can make his remark, how he con-
tinuously pushes the conversation towards the one
goal, sometimes losing the way, finding it again,
and finally arriving at the moment : he is almost
breathless — and then one of the company takes
the remark itself out of his mouth ! What will
he do ? Oppose his own opinion ?

346.

Unintentionally Discourteous. — When
a person treats another with unintentional dis-
courtesy, — for instance, not greeting him because
not recognising him, — he is vexed by it, although
he cannot reproach his own sentiments ; he is
hurt by the bad opinion which he has produced



MAN IN SOCIETY.



279



in the other person, or fears the consequences of
his bad humour, or is pained by the thought of
having injured him, — vanity, fear, or pity may
therefore be aroused ; perhaps all three together.

347.

A Masterpiece of Treachery. — To express
a tantalising distrust of a fellow-conspirator, lest
he should betray one, and this at the very moment
when one is practising treachery one's self, is a
masterpiece of wickedness ; because it absorbs the
other's attention and compels him for a time to act
very unsuspiciously and openly, so that the real
traitor has thus acquired a free hand.

348.

To Injure and to be Injured. — It is far
pleasanter to injure and afterwards beg for forgive-
ness than to be injured and grant forgiveness.
He who does the former gives evidence of power
and afterwards of kindness of character. The
person injured, however, if he does not wish to be
considered inhuman, must forgive ; his enjoyment
of the other's humiliation is insignificant on
account of this constraint.



349.

In a Dispute. — When we contradict another's
opinion and at the same time develop our own,
the constant consideration of the other opinion
usually disturbs the natural attitude of our own



280



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



which appears more intentional, more distinct, and
perhaps somewhat exaggerated.



350.



4



An Artifice. — He who wants to get another
to do something difficult must on no account
treat the matter as a problem, but must set forth
his plan plainly as the only one possible ; and
when the adversary's eye betrays objection and
opposition he must understand how to break off
quickly, and allow him no time to put in a word.

351.

Pricks of Conscience after Social
Gatherings. — Why does our conscience prick
us after ordinary social gatherings ? Because we
have treated serious things lightly, because in
talking of persons we have not spoken quite justly
or have been silent when we should have spoken,
because, sometimes, we have not jumped up and
run away, — in short, because we have behaved in
society as if we belonged to it.



352.

We are Misjudged. — He who always listens
to hear how he is judged is always vexed. For
we are misjudged even by those who are nearest
to us (" who know us best"). Even good friends
sometimes vent their ill-humour in a spiteful
word ; and would they be our friends if they knew
us rightly? The judgments of the indifferent



MAN IN SOCIETY. 28 1

wound us deeply, because they sound so impartial,
so objective almost. But when we see that
some one hostile to us knows us in a concealed
point as well as we know ourselves, how great is
then our vexation !

353-

The Tyranny of the Portrait. — Artists
and statesmen, who out of particular features
quickly construct the whole picture of a man or
an event, are mostly unjust in demanding that
the event or person should afterwards be actually
as they have painted it ; they demand straightway
that a man should be just as gifted, cunning, and
unjust as he is in their representation of him.

354.

Relatives as the Best Friends. — The
Greeks, who knew so well what a friend was,
they alone of all peoples have a profound and
largely philosophical discussion of friendship ; so
that it is by them firstly (and as yet lastly) that
the problem of the friend has been recognised
as worthy of solution, — these same Greeks have
designated relatives by an expression which is
the superlative of the word " friend." This is
inexplicable to me.

355.

Misunderstood Honesty. — When any one
quotes himself in conversation (" I then said," " I
am accustomed to say "), it gives the impression
of presumption ; whereas it often proceeds from



282



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



quite an opposite source ; or at least from honesty,
which does not wish to deck and adorn the
present moment with wit which belongs to an
earlier moment.

356.

The Parasite. — It denotes entire absence of
a noble disposition when a person prefers to live
in dependence at the expense of others, usually
with a secret bitterness against them, in order only
that he may not be obliged to work. Such a
disposition is far more frequent in women than
in men, also far more pardonable (for historical
reasons).

357.

On the Altar of Reconciliation. — There
are circumstances under which one can only gain
a point from a person by wounding him and
becoming hostile ; the feeling of having a foe
torments him so much that he gladly seizes the
first indication of a milder disposition to effect
a reconciliation, and offers on the altar of this
reconciliation what was formerly of such im-
portance to him that he would not give it up
at any price.

358.

Presumption in Demanding Pity. — There
are people who, when they have been in a rage
and have insulted others, demand, firstly, that
it shall all be taken in good part ; and, secondly,
that they shall be pitied because they are subject
to such violent paroxysms. So far does human
presumption extend.



MAN IN SOCIETY.



2^3



359.

Bait. — " Every man has his price " — that is
not true. But perhaps every one can be found
a bait of one kind or other at which he will
snap. Thus, in order to gain some supporters
for a cause, it is only necessary to give it the
glamour of being philanthropic, noble, charitable,
and self-denying — and to what cause could this
glamour not be given ! It is the sweetmeat and
dainty of their soul ; others have different ones.



360.

The Attitude in Praising. — When good
friends praise a gifted person he often appears
to be delighted with them out of politeness and
goodwill, but in reality he feels indifferent.
His real nature is quite unmoved towards them,
and will not budge a step on that account out
of the sun or shade in which it lies ; but people
wish to please by praise, and it would grieve
them if one did not rejoice when they praise
a person.

361.

The Experience of Socrates. — If one has
become a master in one thing, one has generally
remained, precisely thereby, a complete dunce
in most other things ; but one forms the very
reverse opinion, as was already experienced by
Socrates. This is the annoyance which makes
association with masters disagreeable.



• > II



284



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



362.

A Means of Defence. — In warring against
stupidity, the most just and gentle of men at
last become brutal. They are thereby, perhaps,
taking the proper course for defence ; for the
most appropriate argument for a stupid brain
is the clenched fist. But because, as has been
said, their character is just and gentle, they suffer
more by this means of protection than they injure
their opponents by it.

363.

Curiosity. — If curiosity did not exist, very
little would be done for the good of our
neighbour. But curiosity creeps into the houses
of the unfortunate and the needy under the
name of duty or of pity. Perhaps there is a
good deal of curiosity even in the much-vaunted
maternal love.

364.

Disappointment in Society. — One man
wishes to be interesting for his opinions, another
for his likes and dislikes, a third for his ac-
quaintances, and a fourth for his solitariness —
and they all meet with disappointment. For he
before whom the play is performed thinks himself
the only play that is to be taken into account.



365.

The Duel. — It may be said in favour of duels
and all affairs of honour that if a man has such



MAN IN SOCIETY. 285

susceptible feelings that he does not care to live
when So-and-so says or thinks this or that about
him ; he has a right to make it a question of the
death of the one or the other. With regard to the
fact that he is so susceptible, it is not at all to
be remonstrated with, in that matter we are the
heirs of the past, of its greatness as well as of
its exaggerations, without which no greatness
ever existed. So when there exists a code of
honour which lets blood stand in place of death,
so that the mind is relieved after a regular duel
it is a great blessing, because otherwise many
human lives would be in danger. Such an
institution, moreover, teaches men to be cautious
in their utterances and makes intercourse with
them possible.

366.

Nobleness and Gratitude. — A noble soul
will be pleased to owe gratitude, and will not
anxiously avoid opportunities of coming under
obligation ; it will also be moderate afterwards
in the expression of its gratitude; baser souls,
on the other hand, are unwilling to be under any
obligation, or are afterwards immoderate in their
expressions of thanks and altogether too devoted.
The latter is, moreover, also the case with persons
of mean origin or depressed circumstances ; to
show them a favour seems to them a miracle of
grace.

367.

Occasions of Eloquence. — In order to talk
well one man needs a person who is decidedly and



286



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



avowedly his superior to talk to, while another
can only find absolute freedom of speech and
happy turns of eloquence before one who is his
inferior. In both cases the cause is the same ;
each of them talks well only when he talks sans
gine — the one because in the presence of something
higher he does not feel the impulse of rivalry
and competition, the other because he also lacks
the same impulse in the presence of something
lower. Now there is quite another type of men,
who talk well only when debating, with the
intention of conquering. Which of the two types
is the more aspiring : the one that talks well from
excited ambition, or the one that talks badly
or not at all from precisely the same motive ?



368.

The Talent for Friendship. — Two types
are distinguished amongst people who have a
special faculty for friendship. The one is ever on
the ascent, and for every phase of his development
he finds a friend exactly suited to him. The series
of friends which he thus acquires is seldom a con-
sistent one, and is sometimes at variance and in
contradiction, entirely in accordance with the fact
that the later phases of his development neutralise
or prejudice the earlier phases. Such a man may
jestingly be called a ladder. The other type is
represented by him who exercises an attractive in-
fluence on very different characters and endowments,
so that he wins a whole circle of friends ; these,
however, are thereby brought voluntarily into



MAN IN SOCIETY. 287

friendly relations with one another in spite of all
differences. Such a man may be called a circle^ for
this homogeneousness of such different tempera-
ments and natures must somehow be typified in
him. Furthermore, the faculty for having good
friends is greater in many people than the faculty
for being a good friend.



369.

Tactics in Conversation. — After a conver-
sation with a person one is best pleased with him
when one has had an opportunity of exhibiting
one's intelligence and amiability in all its glory.
Shrewd people who wish to impress a person favour-
ably make use of this circumstance, they provide
him with the best opportunities for making a good
joke, and so on in conversation. An amusing
conversation might be imagined between two
very shrewd persons, each wishing to impress the
other favourably, and therefore each throwing to
the other the finest chances in conversation, which
neither of them accepted, so that the conversation
on the whole might turn out spiritless and unat-
tractive because each assigned to the other the
opportunity of being witty and charming.



370.

Discharge of Indignation. — The man
who meets with a failure attributes this failure
rather to the ill-will of another than to fate.



288



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



His irritated feelings are alleviated by think-
ing that a person and not a thing is the cause
of his failure ; for he can revenge himself on
persons, but is obliged to swallow down the injuries
of fate. Therefore when anything has miscarried
with a prince, those about him are accustomed to
point out some individual as the ostensible cause,
who is sacrificed in the interests of all the courtiers ;
for otherwise the prince's indignation would vent
itself on them all, as he can take no revenge on
the Goddess of Destiny herself.



371.

Assuming the Colours of the Environ-
ment. — Why are likes and dislikes so contagious
that we can hardly live near a very sensitive person
without being filled, like a hogshead, with his /ors
and againsts ? In the first place, complete forbear-
ance of judgment is very difficult, and sometimes
absolutely intolerable to our vanity ; it has the
same appearance as poverty of thought and
sentiment, or as timidity and unmanliness ; and so
we are, at least, driven on to take a side, perhaps
contrary to our environment, if this attitude gives
greater pleasure to our pride. Asa rule, however, —
and this is the second point, — we are not conscious
of the transition from indifference to liking or
disliking, but we gradually accustom ourselves to
the sentiments of our environment, and because
sympathetic agreement and acquiescence are so
agreeable, we soon wear all the signs and party-
colours of our surroundings.



MAN IN SOCIETY. 289

372.

Irony. — Irony is only permissible as a peda-
gogic expedient, on the part of a teacher when
dealing with his pupils ; its purpose is to humble
and to shame, but in the wholesome way that
causes good resolutions to spring up and teaches
people to show honour and gratitude, as they would
to a doctor, to him who has so treated them. The
ironical man pretends to be ignorant, and does it
so well that the pupils conversing with him are
deceived, and in their firm belief in their own
superior knowledge they grow bold and expose all
their weak points ; they lose their cautiousness and
reveal themselves as they are, — until all of a sudden
the light which they have held up to the teacher's
face casts its rays back very humiliatingly upon
themselves. Where such a relation, as that between
teacher and pupil, does not exist, irony is a rudeness
and a vulgar conceit. All ironical writers count on
the silly species of human beings, who like to feel
themselves superior to all others in common with
the author himself, whom they look upon as the
mouthpiece of their arrogance. Moreover, the habit
of irony, like that of sarcasm, spoils the character ;
it gradually fosters the quality of a malicious
superiority ; one finally grows like a snappy dog,
that has learnt to laugh as well as to bite.



373.

Arrogance. — There is nothing one should so
juard against as the growth of the weed called

■I71-M T T"



290



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



arrogance, which spoils all one's good harvest ; for
there is arrogance in cordiality, in showing honour,
in kindly familiarity, in caressing, in friendly
counsel, in acknowledgment of faults, in sympathy
for others, — and all these fine things arouse aversion
when the weed in question grows up among them.
The arrogant man — that is to say, he who desires
to appear more than he is or passes for — always
miscalculates. It is true that he obtains a momen-
tary success, inasmuch as those with whom he is
arrogant generally give him the amount of honour
that he demands, owing to fear or for the sake of j
convenience; but they take a bad revenge for it,j
inasmuch as they subtract from the value which
they hitherto attached to him just as much as he
demands above that amount. There is nothing for
which men ask to be paid dearer than for humilia-
tion. The arrogant man can make his really great
merit so suspicious and small in the eyes of others
that they tread on it with dusty feet. If at all,
we should only allow ourselves a proud manner
where we are quite sure of not being misunder-
stood and considered as arrogant; as, for
instance, with friends and wives. For in social
intercourse there is no greater folly than to acquire
a reputation for arrogance ; it is still worse than
not having learnt to deceive politely.



374.

TkTR'A-T6.TE — Private conversation is the
perfect conversation, because everything the one
person says receives its particular colouring, its



MAN IN SOCIETY. 29I

tone, and its accompanying gestures out of strict
consideration for the other person engaged in the
conversation, it therefore corresponds to what takes
place in intercourse by letter, viz., that one and
the same person exhibits ten kinds of psychical
expression, according as he writes now to this
individual and now to that one. In duologue there
is only a single refraction of thought ; the person
conversed with produces it, as the mirror in whom
we want to behold our thoughts anew in their
finest form. But how is it when there are two or
three, or even more persons conversing with one ?
Conversation then necessarily loses something of
its individualising subtlety, different considerations
thwart and neutralise each other ; the style which
pleases one does not suit the taste of another.
In intercourse with several individuals a person is
therefore to withdraw within himself and represent
facts as they are ; but he has also to remove from
the subjects the pulsating ether of humanity
which makes conversation one of the pleasantest
things in the world. Listen only to the tone
in which those who mingle with whole groups of
men are in the habit of speaking; it is as if
the fundamental base of all speech were, " It is
myself \ I say this, so make what you will of it ! "
That is the reason why clever ladies usually leave
a singular, painful, and forbidding impression on
those who have met them in society ; it is the
talking to many people, before many people, that
robs them of all intellectual amiability and shows
tonly their conscious dependence on themselves,
their tactics, and their intention of gaining a



292



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



public victory in full light ; whilst in a private
conversation the same ladies become womanly
again, and recover their intellectual grace andj
charm.

375.

Posthumous Fame. — There is sense in hoping
for recognition in a distant future only when we
take it for granted that mankind will remain
essentially unchanged, and that whatever is great
is not for one age only but will be looked upon
as great for all time. But this is an error. In
all their sentiments and judgments concerning
what is good and beautiful mankind have greatly
changed ; it is mere fantasy to imagine one's self
to be a mile ahead, and that the whole of mankind
is coming our way. Besides, a scholar who is
misjudged may at present reckon with certainty
that his discovery will be made by others, and
that, at best, it will be allowed to him later on by
some historian that he also already knew this or
that but was not in a position to secure the recog-;
nition of his knowledge. Not to be recognised
is always interpreted by posterity as lack of power.
In short, one should not so readily speak in favour
of haughty solitude. There are, however, ex
ceptional cases ; but it is chiefly our faults, weak
ness, and follies that hinder the recognition of our
great qualities.

376.

Of Friends. — Just consider with thyself howl
different are the feelings, how divided are thd



MAN IN SOCIETY. 293

opinions of even the nearest acquaintances ; how
even the same opinions in thy friend's mind have
quite a different aspect and strength from what
they have in thine own ; and how manifold are
the occasions which arise for misunderstanding
and hostile severance. After all this thou wilt
say to thyself, " How insecure is the ground upon
which all our alliances and friendships rest, how
liable to cold downpours and bad weather, how
lonely is every creature ! " When a person recog-
nises this fact, and, in addition, that all opinions
and the nature and strength of them in his fellow-
men are just as necessary and irresponsible as
their actions ; when his eye learns to see this
internal necessity of opinions, owing to the indis-
soluble interweaving of character, occupation, talent,
and environment, — he will perhaps get rid of the
bitterness and sharpness of the feeling with which
the sage exclaimed, " Friends, there are no friends ! "
Much rather will he make the confession to him-
self : — Yes, there are friends, but they were drawn
towards thee by error and deception concerning
thy character ; and they must have learnt to be
silent in order to remain thy friends ; for such
human relationships almost always rest on the
fact that some few things are never said, are
never, indeed, alluded to; but if these pebbles are set
rolling friendship follows afterwards and is broken.
; Are there any who would not be mortally injured
[if they were to learn what their most intimate
uriends really knew about them ? By getting a
[knowledge of ourselves, and by looking upon our
lature as a changing sphere of opinions and moods,



294



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



and thereby learning to despise ourselves a little,
we recover once more our equilibrium with the
rest of mankind. It is true that we have good
reason to despise each of our acquaintances, even
the greatest of them ; but just as good reason to
turn this feeling against ourselves. And so we
will bear with each other, since we bear with our-
selves ; and perhaps there will come to each a
happier hour, when he will exclaim :



"Friends, there are really no friends ! " thus cried

th' expiring old sophist ;
" Foes, there is really no foe ! " — thus shout I,

the incarnate fool.



SEVENTH DIVISION.
WIFE AND CHILD.

377.
The Perfect Woman. — The perfect woman is
a higher type of humanity than the perfect man,
and also something much rarer. The natural
history of animals furnishes grounds in support of
this theory.

378.

Friendship and Marriage. — The best friend
will probably get the best wife, because a good
marriage is based on talent for friendship.

379.

The Survival of the Parents. — The un-
dissolved dissonances in the relation of the
character and sentiments of the parents survive
in the nature of the child and make up the
history of its inner sufferings.

380.

Inherited from the Mother. — Every one
bears within him an image of woman, inherited
from his mother : it determines his attitude to-



296 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

wards women as a whole, whether to honour,
despise, or remain generally indifferent to them.

381.

Correcting Nature. — Whoever has not got
a good father should procure one.

382.

Fathers and Sons. — Fathers have much to
do to make amends for having sons.

383.

The Error of Gentlewomen. — Gentle-
women think that a thing does not really exist
when it is not possible to talk of it in society.

384.

A Male Disease. — The surest remedy for the
male disease of self-contempt is to be loved by
a sensible woman.

385.

A Species of Jealousy. — Mothers are readily
jealous of the friends of sons who are particularly
successful. As a rule a mother loves herself in
her son more than the son.

386.

Rational Irrationality. — In the maturity
of life and intelligence the feeling comes over a
man that his father did wrong in begetting him.



WIFE AND CHILD. 297

387.

Maternal Excellence. — Some mothers
need happy and honoured children, some need
unhappy ones, — otherwise they cannot exhibit
their maternal excellence.

388.

Different Sighs. — Some husbands have
sighed over the elopement of their wives, the
greater number, however, have sighed because
nobody would elope with theirs.

389.
Love Matches. — Marriages which are con-
tracted for love (so-called love-matches) have error
for their father and need (necessity) for their mother.

390. _

Women's Friendships. — Women can enter^
into friendship with a man perfectly well ; but
in order to maintain it the aid of a little physical
antipathy is perhaps required.

391.

Ennui.t — Many people, especially women, never
feel ennui because they have never learnt to work
properly.

392.

An Element of Love. — In all feminine love
something of maternal love also comes to light.



298 HUMAN, ALL-TOO HUMAN.

393-

Unity of Place and Drama. — If married
couples did not live together, happy marriages
would be more frequent.

394.
The Usual Consequences of Marriage. —
All intercourse which does not elevate a person,
debases him, and vice versa ; hence men usually
sink a little when they marry, while women are
somewhat elevated. Over-intellectual men require
marriage in proportion as they are opposed to it
as to a repugnant medicine.

395.
Learning to Command. — Children of unpre-
tentious families must be taught to command, just
as much as other children must be taught to obey,

396.
Wanting to be in Love. — Betrothed couples
who have been matched by convenience often
exert themselves to fall in love^ to avoid the
reproach of cold, calculating expediency. In the
same manner those who become converts to
Christianity for their advantage exert themselves
to become genuinely pious ; because the religious
cast of countenance then becomes easier to them.

397-
No Standing Still in Love. — A musician
who loves the slow tempo will play the same pieces



WIFE AND CHILD. 299

ever more slowly. There is thus no standing
still in any love.

398.

Modesty. — Women's modesty usually increases
with their beauty.*

399.
Marriage on a Good Basis. — A marriage
in which each wishes to realise an individual aim
by means of the other will stand well ; for instance,
when the woman wishes to become famous through
the man and the man beloved through the woman.

400.

Proteus-Nature. — Through love women
actually become what they appear to be in the
imagination of their lovers.

401.

To Love and to Possess. — As a rule women
love a distinguished man to the extent that they
wish to possess him exclusively. They would
gladly keep him under lock and key, if their
vanity did not forbid, but vanity demands that
he should also appear distinguished before others.

402.

The Test of a Good Marriage. — The good-
ness of a marriage is proved by the fact that it
can stand an " exception."

* The opposite of this aphorism also holds good. — J. M. K.



300 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

403.

Bringing Anyone Round to Anything. —
One may make any person so weak and weary by
disquietude, anxiety, and excess of work or thought
that he no longer resists anything that appears
complicated, but gives way to it, — diplomatists
and women know this.

404.

Propriety and Honesty. — Those girls who
mean to trust exclusively to their youthful charms
for their provision in life, and whose cunning is
further prompted by worldly mothers, have just
the same aims as courtesans, only they are wiser
and less honest.

405.

Masks. — There are women who, wherever one
examines them, have no inside, but are mere
masks. A man is to be pitied who has connec-
tion with such almost spectre-like and necessarily
unsatisfactory creatures, but it is precisely such
women who know how to excite a man's desire
most strongly ; he seeks for their soul, and seeks
evermore.

406.

Marriage as a Long Talk. — In entering
on a marriage one should ask one's self the
question, " Do you think you will pass your
time well with this woman till your old age ? "
All else in marriage is transitory ; talk, however,
occupies most of the time of the association.



WIFE AND CHILD. 3OI

407.

Girlish Dreams. — Inexperienced girls flatter
themselves with the notion that it is in their
power to make a man happy ; later on they learn
that it is equivalent to underrating a man to
suppose that he needs only a girl to make him
happy. Women's vanity requires a man to be
something more than merely a happy husband.

408.

The Dying-out of Faust and Marguerite.
— According to the very intelligent remark of a
scholar, the educated men of modern Germany
resemble somewhat a mixture of Mephistopheles
and Wagner, but are not at all like Faust, whom
our grandfathers (in their youth at least) felt
agitating within them. To them, therefore, — to
continue the remark, — Marguerites are not suited,
for two reasons. And because the latter are no
longer desired they seem to be dying out.

409.

Classical Education for Girls. — For
goodness' sake let us not give our classical educa-
tion to girls ! An education which, out of in-
genious, inquisitive, ardent youths, so frequently
makes — copies of their teacher !

410.

Without Rivals. — Women readily perceive
in a man whether his soul has already been taken



302



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



possession of; they wish to be loved without'
rivals, and find fault with the objects of his am-
bition, his political tasks, his sciences and arts, if he
have a passion for such things. Unless he be
distinguished thereby, — then, in the case of a love-
relationship between them, women look at the
same time for an increase of their own distinction ;
under such circumstances, they favour the lover.



411.

The Feminine Intellect. — The intellect of
women manifests itself as perfect mastery, presence
of mind, and utilisation of all advantages. They
transmit it as a fundamental quality to their
children, and the father adds thereto the darker
background of the will. His influence determines
as it were the rhythm and harmony with which the
new life is to be performed ; but its melody is
derived from the mother. For those who know
how to put a thing properly : women have in-
telligence, men have character and passion. This
does not contradict the fact that men actually
achieve so much more with their intelligence:
they have deeper and more powerful impulses ;
and it is these which carry their understanding
(in itself something passive) to such an extent
Women are often silently surprised at the great
respect men pay to their character. When, there-
fore, in the choice of a partner men seek specially
for a being of deep and strong character, and
women for a being of intelligence, brilliancy, and
presence of mind, it is plain that at bottom men



WIFE AND CHILD. 3O3

seek for the ideal man, and women for the ideal
woman, — consequently not for the complement
but for the completion of their own excellence.



412.

Hesiod's Opinion Confirmed. — It is a sign
of women's wisdom that they have almost always
known how to get themselves supported, like
drones in a bee-hive. Let us just consider what
this meant originally, and why men do not de-
pend upon women for their support. Of a truth
it is because masculine vanity and reverence are
greater than feminine wisdom ; for women have
known how to secure for themselves by their sub-
ordination the greatest advantage, in fact, the
upper hand. Even the care of children may
originally have been used by the wisdom of women
as an excuse for withdrawing themselves as much
as possible from work. And at present they still
understand when they are really active (as house-
keepers, for instance) how to make a bewildering
fuss about it, so that the merit of their activity is
usually ten times over-estimated by men.



413.

Lovers as Short-sighted People. — A pair
of powerful spectacles has sometimes sufficed to
cure a person in love ; and whoever has had suffi-
cient imagination to represent a face or form
twenty years older, has probably gone through
life not much disturbed.



304



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



414.

Women in Hatred. — In a state of hatredj
women are more dangerous than men ; for on<
thing, because they are hampered by no regard^
for fairness when their hostile feelings have been;
aroused; but let their hatred develop unchecked |
to its utmost consequences; then also, because.'
they are expert in finding sore spots (which every,
man and every party possess), and pouncing upon J
them : for which purpose their dagger-pointed in-
telligence is of good service (whilst men, hesitat-
ing at the sight of wounds, are often generously
and conciliatorily inclined).



415.

Love. — The love idolatry which women practise
is fundamentally and originally an intelligent de-
vice, inasmuch as they increase their power by all
the idealisings of love and exhibit themselves as so
much the more desirable in the eyes of men. But
by being accustomed for centuries to this exagger-
ated appreciation of love, it has come to pass that
they have been caught in their own net and have
forgotten the origin of the device. They them-
selves are now still more deceived than the men,
and on that account also suffer more from the dis-
illusionment which, almost necessarily, enters into
the life of every woman — so far, at any rate, as she;
has sufficient imagination and intelligence to bej
able to be deceived and undeceived.



"WIFE AND CHILD. 305

416.

The Emancipation of Women. — Can women
be at all just, when they are so accustomed to love
and to be immediately biased for or against?
For that reason they are also less interested in
things and more in individuals : but when they are
interested in things they immediately become their
partisans, and thereby spoil their pure, innocent
effect. Thus there arises a danger, by no means
small, in entrusting politics and certain portions of
science to them (history, for instance). For what
is rarer than a woman who really knows what
science is ? Indeed the best of them cherish in
their breasts a secret scorn for science, as if they
were somehow superior to it. Perhaps all this
can be changed in time ; but meanwhile it is so.

417.

The Inspiration in Women's Judgments.
— The sudden decisions, for or against, which
women are in the habit of making, the flashing
illumination of personal relations caused by their
spasmodic inclinations and aversions, — in short, the
proofs of feminine injustice have been invested
with a lustre by men who are in love, as if all
women had inspirations of wisdom, even without
the Delphic cauldron and the laurel wreaths ; and
their utterances are interpreted and duly set forth
as Sibylline oracles for long afterwards. When
one considers, however, that for every person and
for every cause something can be said in favour

VOL. I, U



306



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



of it but equally also something against it, that
things are not only two-sided, but also three and
four-sided, it is almost difficult to be entirely at
fault in such sudden decisions ; indeed, it might be
said that the nature of things has been so arranged
that women should always carry their point.*

418.

' Being Loved. — As one of every two persons'
in love is usually the one who loves, the other
the one who is loved, the belief has arisen that
in every love-affair there is a constant amount
of love; and that the more of it the one person
monopolises the less is left for the other. Ex-
ceptionally it happens that the vanity of each of the
parties persuades him or her that it is he or she
who must be loved ; so that both of them wish to
be loved: from which cause many half funny, half
absurd scenes take place, especially in married life.



419.

Contradictions in Feminine Minds.-
Owing to the fact that women are so much more
personal than objective, there are tendencies
included in the range of their ideas which are
logically in contradiction to one another; they
are accustomed in turn to become enthusiastically
fond just of the representatives of these tendencies

* It may be remarked that Nietzsche changed his view
on this subject later on, and ascribed more importance to
woman's intuition. Cf. also Disraeli's reference to the
"High Priestesses of predestination." — J. M. K.



WIFE AND CHILD. 307

and accept their systems in the lump ; but in
such wise that a dead place originates wherever
a new personality afterwards gets the ascendancy.
It may happen that the whole philosophy in the
mind of an old lady consists of nothing but such
dead places.

420.

Who Suffers the More ? — After a personal
dissension and quarrel between a woman and a
man the latter party suffers chiefly from the idea
of having wounded the other, whilst the former
suffers chiefly from the idea of not having wounded
the other sufficiently ; so she subsequently en-
deavours by tears, sobs, and discomposed mien,
to make his heart heavier.

421.

An Opportunity for Feminine Magnan-
imity. — If we could disregard the claims of
custom in our thinking we might consider whether
nature and reason do not suggest several marriages
for men, one after another: perhaps that, at the
age of twenty-two, he should first marry an older
girl who is mentally and morally his superior, and
can be his leader through all the dangers of the
twenties (ambition, hatred, self-contempt, and
passions of all kinds). This woman's affection
would subsequently change entirely into maternal
love, and she would not only submit to it but
would encourage the man in the most salutary

I manner, if in his thirties he contracted an alliance
with quite a young girl whose education he



3o8



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



himself should take in hand. Marriage is a
necessary institution for the twenties ; a useful,
but not necessary, institution for the thirties ; for
later life it is often harmful, and .4iromQtes Jhe
mental deterioration of the man.



422.

The Tragedy of Childhood. — Perhaps it
not infrequently happens that noble men with lofty
aims have to fight their hardest battle in child-
hood ; by having perchance to carry out their
principles in opposition to a base-minded father
addicted to feigning and falsehood, or living, like
Lord Byron, in constant warfare with a childish
and passionate mother. He who has had such
an experience will never be able to forget all his
life who has been his greatest and most dangerous
enemy.

423.

Parental Folly. — The grossest mistakes in
judging a man are made by his parents, — this is
a fact, but how is it to be explained ? Have the
parents too much experience of the child and
cannot any longer arrange this experience into a
unity? It has been noticed that it is only in
the earlier period of their sojourn in foreign
countries that travellers rightly grasp the general
distinguishing features of a people ; the better
they come to know it, they are the less able to
see what is typical and distinguishing in a people.
As soon as they grow short-sighted their eyes 1
cease to be long-sighted. Do parents, therefore,



WIFE AND CHILD. 309

judge their children falsely because they have
never stood far enough away from them ? The
following is quite another explanation : people
are no longer accustomed to reflect on what is
close at hand and surrounds them, but just accept
it. Perhaps the usual thoughtlessness of parents
is the reason why they judge so wrongly when
once they are compelled to judge their children.



424.

The Future of Marriage. — The noble
and liberal-minded women who take as their
mission the education and elevation of the female
sex, should not overlook one point of view : .
'Marriage regarded in its highest aspect, as the.,
spiritual friendship of two persons of opposite
sexes, and accordingly such as is hoped for in
future, contracted for the purpose of producing
and educating a new generation, — such marriage,
which only makes use of the sensual, so to speak,
as a rare and occasional means to a higher
purpose, will, it is to be feared, probably need a
natural auxiliary, namely, concubinage. For if,
on the grounds of his health, the wife is also
to serve for the sole satisfaction of the man's
sexual needs, a wrong perspective, opposed to the
aims indicated, will have most influence in the
choice of a wife. The aims referred to : the
production of descendants, will be accidental, and
their successful education highly improbable. A
j good wife, who has to be friend, helper, child -bearer,
i mother, family-head and manager, and has even

I



310



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



perhaps to conduct her own business and affairs
separately from those of the husband, cannot at
the same time be a concubine ; it would, in general,
be asking too much of her. In the future, there-
fore, a state of things might take place the
opposite of what existed at Athens in the time
of Pericles ; the men, whose wives were then little
more to them than concubines, turned besides to
the Aspasias, because they longed for the charms
of a companionship gratifying both to head and
heart, such as the grace and intellectual suppleness
of women could alone provide. All human in-
stitutions, just like marriage, allow only a moderate
amount of practical idealising, failing which coarse
remedies immediately become necessary.



425.

The "Storm and Stress" Period of
Women. — In the three or four civilised countries
of Europe, it is possible, by several centuries of
education, to make out of women anything we
like, — even men, not in a sexual sense, of course,
but in every other. Under such influences they
will acquire all the masculine virtues and forces,
at the same time, of course, they must also have
taken all the masculine weaknesses and vices into
the bargain : so much, as has been said, we can
command. But how shall we endure the inter-
mediate state thereby induced, which may even
last two or three centuries, during which feminine
follies and injustices, woman's original birthday
endowment, will still maintain the ascendancy



WIFE AND CHILD. 3 II

over all that has been otherwise gained and
acquired ? This will be the time when indigna-
tion will be the peculiar masculine passion ;
indignation, because all arts and sciences have
been overflowed and choked by an unprecedented
dilettanteism, philosophy talked to death by brain-
bewildering chatter, politics more fantastic and
partisan than ever, and society in complete dis-
organisation, because the conservatrices of ancient
customs have become ridiculous to themselves,
and have endeavoured in every way to place
themselves outside the pale of custom. If indeed
women had their greatest power in custom, where
will they have to look in order to reacquire a
similar plenitude of power after having renounced
custom ?

426.

Free-Spirit and Marriage. — Will free-
thinkers live with women ? In general, I think
that, like the prophesying birds of old, like the
truth-thinkers and truth-speakers of the present,
they must prefer to fly alone.

427.

The Happiness of Marriage. — Everything
to which we are accustomed draws an ever-
tightening cobweb-net around us ; and presently
We notice that the threads have become cords,
and that we ourselves sit in the middle like
a spider that has here got itself caught and
must feed on its own blood. Hence the free
spirit hates all rules and customs, all that is



312



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



permanent and definitive, hence he painfully
tears asunder again and again the net around
him, though in consequence thereof he will suffer
from numerous wounds, slight and severe ; for he
must break off every thread from himself, from
his body and soul. He must learn to love where
he has hitherto hated, and vice versa. Indeed, it
must not be a thing impossible for him to sow
dragon's teeth in the same field in which he
formerly scattered the abundance of his bounty.
From this it can be inferred whether he is suited
for the happiness of marriage.

428.

Too Intimate. — When we live on too
intimate terms with a person it is as if we were
again and again handling a good engraving with
our fingers ; the time comes when we have soiled
and damaged paper in our hands, and nothing
more. A man's soul also gets worn out by
constant handling ; at least, it eventually appears
so to us — never again do we see its original design
and beauty. We always lose through too familiar
association with women and friends ; and some-
times we lose the pearl of our life thereby.



429.

The Golden Cradle. — The free spirit will
always feel relieved when he has finally resolved
to shake off the motherly care and guardianship
with which women surround him. What harm
will a rough wind, from which he has been so



WIFE AND CHILD. 313

anxiously protected, do him ? Of what consequence
is a genuine disadvantage, loss, misfortune, sick-
ness, illness, fault, or folly more or less in his life,
compared with the bondage of the golden cradle,
the peacock's-feather fan, and the oppressive feel-
ing that he must, in addition, be grateful because
he is waited on and spoiled like a baby ? Hence
it is that the milk which is offered him by the
motherly disposition of the women about him can
so readily turn into gall.



430.

A Voluntary Victim. — There is nothing
by which able women can so alleviate the lives of
their husbands, should these be great and famous,
as by becoming, so to speak, the receptacle for the
general disfavour and occasional ill-humour of the
rest of mankind. Contemporaries are usually ac-
customed to overlook many mistakes, follies, and
even flagrant injustices in their great men if only
they can find some one to maltreat and kill, as a
proper victim for the relief of their feelings. A
wife not infrequently has the ambition to present
herself for this sacrifice, and then the husband
may indeed feel satisfied, — he being enough of an
egoist to have such a voluntary storm, rain, and
lightning-conductor beside him.



431-

Agreeable Adversaries. — The natural in-
clination of women towards quiet, regular, happily



314



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



tuned existences and intercourse, the oil-like and
calming effect of their influence upon the sea of
life, operates unconsciously against the heroic
inner impulse of the free spirit. Without know-
ing it, women act as if they were taking away the
stones from the path of the wandering mineral-
ogist in order that he might not strike his foot
against them — when he has gone out for the
very purpose of striking against them.



432.

The Discord of Two Concords. — Woman
wants to serve, and finds her happiness therein ;
the free spirit does not want to be served, and
therein finds his happiness.



433.

Xantippe. — Socrates found a wife such as he
required, — but he would not have sought her had
he known her suflficiently well ; even the heroism
of his free spirit would not have gone so far. As
a matter of fact, Xantippe forced him more and
more into his peculiar profession, inasmuch as she
made house and home doleful and dismal to him ;
she taught him to live in the streets and wher-
ever gossiping and idling went on, and thereby
made him the greatest Athenian street-dia-
lectician, who had, at last, to compare himself
to a gad-fly which a god had set on the neck of
the beautiful horse Athens to prevent it from
resting.



WIFE AND CHILD. 315

434.

Blind to the Future. — Just as mothers have
senses and eye only for those pains of their children
that are evident to the senses and eye, so the
wives of men of high aspirations cannot accustom
themselves to see their husbands suffering, starv-
ing, or slighted, — although all this is, perhaps, not
only the proof that they have rightly chosen their
attitude in life, but even the guarantee that their
great aims must be achieved some time. Women
always intrigue privately against the higher souls
of their husbands ; they want to cheat them out
of their future for the sake of a painless and
comfortable present.

435-
Authority and Freedom. — However highly
women may honour their husbands, they honour
still more the powers and ideas recognised by
society; they have been accustomed for mil-
lennia to go along with their hands folded on
their breasts, and their heads bent before every-
thing dominant, disapproving of all resistance to
public authority. They therefore unintentionally,
and as if from instinct, hang themselves as a drag
on the wheels of free-spirited, independent en-
deavour, and in certain circumstances make their
husbands highly impatient, especially when the
latter persuade themselves that it is really love
which prompts the action of their wives. To
disapprove of women's methods and generously
to honour the motives that prompt them — that is
man's nature and often enough his despair.



3i6



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



43^-

Ceterum Censeo. — It is laughable when a com-
pany of paupers decree the abolition of the right
of inheritance, and it is not less laughable when
childless persons labour for the practical law-
giving of a country : they have not enough ballast
in their ship to sail safely over the ocean of the
future. But it seems equally senseless if a man
who has chosen for his mission the widest know-
ledge and estimation of universal existence, burdens
himself with personal considerations for a family,
with the support, protection, and care of wife and
child, and in front of his telescope hangs that
gloomy veil through which hardly a ray from the
distant firmament can penetrate. Thus I, too,
agree with the opinion that in matters of the
highest philosophy all married men are to be
suspected.

437.

Finally. — There are many kinds of hemlock,
and fate generally finds an opportunity to put a
cup of this poison to the lips of the free spirit, —
in order to " punish " him, as every one then says.
What do the women do about him then ? They
cry and lament, and perhaps disturb the sunset-
calm of the thinker, as they did in the prison at
Athens. " Oh Crito, bid some one take those
women away ! " said Socrates at last.



EIGHTH DIVISION.
A GLANCE AT THE STATE.

438.
Asking to be Heard. — The demagogic dis-
position and the intention of working upon the
masses is at present common to all political
parties ; on this account they are all obliged to
change their principles into great al fresco follies
and thus make a show of them. In this matter
there is no further alteration to be made : indeed,
it is superfluous even to raise a finger against it ;
for here Voltaire's saying applies : " Quand la
populace se mile de raisonner, tout est perdu."
Since this has happened we have to accommodate
ourselves to the new conditions, as we have to
accommodate ourselves when an earthquake has
displaced the old boundaries and the contour of the
land and altered the value of property. More-
over, when it is once for all a question in the politics
of all parties to make life endurable to the great-
est possible majority, this majority may always
decide what they understand by an endurable life ;
if they believe their intellect capable of finding the
right means to this end why should we doubt
about it? They want, once for all, to be the
architects of their own good or ill fortune ; and if



I



3l8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



their feeling of free choice and their pride in the
five or six ideas that their brain conceals and
brings to light, really makes life so agreeable to
them that they gladly put up with the fatal con-
sequences of their narrow-mindedness, there is
little to object to, provided that their narrow-
mindedness does not go so far as to demand that
everything shall become politics in this sense, that
all shall live and act according to this standard.
For, in the first place, it must be more than ever
permissible for some people to keep aloof from
politics and to stand somewhat aside. To this
they are also impelled by the pleasure of free
choice, and connected with this there may even be
some little pride in keeping silence when too many,
and only the many, are speaking. Then this
small group must be excused if they do not attach
such great importance to the happiness of the
majority (nations or strata of population may be
understood thereby), and are occasionally guilty
of an ironical grimace ; for their seriousness lies
elsewhere, their conception of happiness is quite
different, and their aim cannot be encompassed
by every clumsy hand that has just five fingers.
F"inally, there comes from time to time — what is
certainly most difficult to concede to them, but
must also be conceded — a moment when they
emerge from their silent solitariness and try once
more the strength of their lungs ; they then call
to each other like people lost in a wood, to make
themselves known and for mutual encouragement ;
whereby, to be sure, much becomes audible that
sounds evil to ears for which it is not intended.






A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 319

Soon, however, silence again prevails in the wood,
such silence that the buzzing, humming, and
fluttering of the countless insects that live in,
above, and beneath it, are again plainly heard.

439.

Culture and Caste. — A higher culture can
only originate where there are two distinct castes
of society : that of the working class, and that of
the leisured class who are capable of true leisure ;
or, more strongly expressed, the caste of com-
pulsory labour and the caste of free labour. The
point of view of the division of happiness is not
essential when it is a question of the production
of a higher culture ; in any case, however, the
leisured caste is more susceptible to suffering and
suffer more, their pleasure in existence is less and
their task is greater. Now supposing there should
be quite an interchange between the two castes,
so that on the one hand the duller and less
intelligent families and individuals are lowered
from the higher caste into the lower, and, on the
other hand, the freer men of the lower caste obtain
access to the higher, a condition of things would
be attained beyond which one can only perceive
the open sea of vague wishes. Thus speaks to us
the vanishing voice of the olden time ; but where
are there still ears to hear it ?

440.

Of Good Blood. — That which men and
women of good blood possess much more tharj



k



320 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

others, and which gives them an undoubted right
to be more highly appreciated, are two arts which
are always increased by inheritance : the art of
being able to command, and the art of proud
obedience. Now wherever commanding is the
business of the day (as in the great world of
commerce and industry), there results something
similar to these families of good blood, only the
noble bearing in obedience is lacking which is an
inheritance from feudal conditions and hardly
grows any longer in the climate of our culture.

441.

Subordination. — The subordination which
is so highly valued in military and official ranks
will soon become as incredible to us as the secret
tactics of the Jesuits have already become ; and
when this subordination is no longer possible a
multitude of astonishing results will no longer be
attained, and the world will be all the poorer.
It must disappear, for its foundation is disappear-
ing, the belief in unconditional authority, in
ultimate truth ; even in military ranks physical
compulsion is not sufficient to produce it, but only
the inherited adoration of the princely as of some-
thing superhuman. In freer circumstances people
subordinate themselves only on conditions, in
compliance with a mutual contract, consequently
with all the provisos of self-interest.

442.

The National Army. — The greatest dis-
advantage of the national army, now so much



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 32 1

glorified, lies in the squandering of men of the
highest civilisation ; it is only by the favourable-
ness of all circumstances that there are such men
at all ; how carefully and anxiously should we deal
with them, since long periods are required to
create the chance conditions for the production of
such delicately organised brains ! But as the
Greeks wallowed in the blood of Greeks, so do
Europeans now in the blood of Europeans : and
indeed, taken relatively, it is mostly the highly
cultivated who are sacrificed, those who promise
an abundant and excellent posterity ; for such
stand in the front of the battle as commanders,
and also expose themselves to most danger, by
reason of their higher ambition. At present, when
quite other and higher tasks are assigned than
patria and honor, the rough Roman patriotism
is either something dishonourable or a sign of
being behind the times.



443-

Hope as Presumption. — Our social order will
slowly melt away, as all former orders have done,
as soon as the suns of new opinions have shone
upon mankind with a new glow. We can only
wish this melting away in the hope thereof, and
we are only reasonably entitled to hope when we
believe that we and our equals have more strength
in heart and head than the representatives of the
existing state of things. As a rule, therefore, this
hope will be a presumption, an over- estimation.

VOL. I. X



322



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



444.

War. — Against war it may be said that it
makes the victor stupid and the vanquished re-
vengeful. In favour of war it may be said that
it barbarises in both its above-named results, and
thereby makes more natural ; it is the sleep or
the winter period of culture ; man emerges from
it with greater strength for good and for evil.

445.

In the Prince's Service. — To be able to
act quite regardlessly it is best for a statesman
to carry out his work not for himself but for a
prince. The eye of the spectator is dazzled by
the splendour of this general disinterestedness, so
that it does not see the malignancy and severity
which the work of a statesman brings with it.*



446.

A Question of Power, not of Right. — As
regards Socialism, in the eyes of those who always
consider higher utility, if it is really a rising
against their oppressors of those who for centuries
have been oppressed and downtrodden, there is
no problem of right involved (notwithstanding the
ridiculous, effeminate question," How far ought we to
grant its demands ? ") but only a problem oi power
(" How far can we make use of its demands ? ") ;

* This aphorism may have been suggested by Nietzsche's
observing the behaviour of his great contemporary, Bismarck,
towards the dynasty. — J. M. K.



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 323

the same, therefore, as in the case of a natural
force, — steam, for instance, — which is either forced
by man into his service, as a machine-god, or
which, in case of defects of the machine, that is to
say, defects of human calculation in its construc-
tion, destroys it and man together. In order to
solve this question of power we must know how
strong Socialism is, in what modification it may
yet be employed as a powerful lever in the
present mechanism of political forces ; under cer-
tain circumstances we should do all we can to
strengthen it. With every great force — be it the
most dangerous — men have to think how they
can make of it an instrument for their purposes.
Socialism acquires a right only if war seems to
have taken place between the two powers, the
representatives of the old and the new, when,
however, a wise calculation of the greatest
possible preservation and advantageousness to
both sides gives rise to a desire for a treaty.
Without treaty no right. So far, however, there
is neither war nor treaty on the ground in question,
therefore no rights, no " ought."

447.

Utilising the most Trivial Dishonesty. —
The power of the press consists in the fact that
every individual who ministers to it only feels
himself bound and constrained to a very small
extent. He usually expresses his opinion, but
sometimes also does not express it in order to
serve his party or the politics of his country, or



324



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



even himself. Such little faults of dishonesty, or
perhaps only of a dishonest silence, are not hard
to bear by the individual, but the consequences
are extraordinary, because these little faults are
committed by many at the same time. Each one
says to himself: "For such small concessions I
live better and can make my income ; by the
want of such little compliances I make myself
impossible." Because it seems almost morally
indifferent to write a line more (perhaps even
without signature), or not to write it, a person
who has money and influence can make any
opinion a public one. He who knows that most
people are weak in trifles, and wishes to attain
his own ends thereby, is always dangerous.



448.

Too Loud a Tone in Grievances. — Through
the fact that an account of a bad state of things
(for instance, the crimes of an administration,
bribery and arbitrary favour in political or learned
bodies) is greatly exaggerated, it fails in its effect
on intelligent people, but has all the greater effect
on the unintelligent (who would have remained
indifferent to an accurate and moderate account).
But as these latter are considerably in the majority,
and harbour in themselves stronger will-power
and more impatient desire for action, the ex-
aggeration becomes the cause of investigations,
punishments, promises, and reorganisations. In
so far it is useful to exaggerate the accounts of
bad states of things.



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 325
449.

The Apparent Weather - Makers of
Politics. — Just as people tacitly assume that
he who understands the weather, and foretells it
about a day in advance, makes the weather, so
even the educated and learned, with a display of
superstitious faith, ascribe to great statesmen as
their most special work all the important changes
and conjunctures that have taken place during
their administration, when it is only evident that
they knew something thereof a little earlier than
other people and made their calculations accord-
ingly, — thus they are also looked upon as weather-
makers — and this belief is not the least important
instrument of their power.

450.

New and Old Conceptions of Govern-
ment. — To draw such a distinction between
Government and people as if two separate spheres
of power, a stronger and higher, and a weaker and
lower, negotiated and came to terms with each other,
is a remnant of transmitted political sentiment,
which still accurately represents the historic estab-
lishment of the conditions of power in most States.
When Bismarck, for instance, describes the con-
stitutional system as a compromise between
Government and people, he speaks in accordance
with a principle which has its reason in history
(from whence, to be sure, it also derives its ad-
mixture of folly, without which nothing human



326



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



can exist). On the other hand, we must now
learn — in accordance with a principle which
has originated only in the brain and has still to
make history — that Government is nothing but
an organ of the people, — not an attentive, honour-
able " higher " in relation to a " lower " accustomed
to modesty. Before we accept this hitherto un-
historical and arbitrary, although logical, formula-
tion of the conception of Government, let us but
consider its consequences, for the relation between
people and Government is the strongest typical
relation, after the pattern of which the relationship
between teacher and pupil, master and servants,
father and family, leader and soldier, master and
apprentice, is unconsciously formed. At present,
under the influence of the prevailing constitutional
system of government, all these relationships are
changing a little, — they are becoming com-
promises. But how they will have to be reversed
and shifted, and change name and nature, when
that newest of all conceptions has got the upper
hand everywhere in people's minds ! — to achieve
which, however, a century may yet be required. In
this matter there is nothing further to be wished
for except caution and slow development.



451.

Justice as the Decoy-Cry of Parties. —
Well may noble (if not exactly very intelligent)
representatives of the governing classes asseverate :
" We will treat men equally and grant them
equal rights " ; so far a socialistic mode of thought



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 327

which is based on justice is possible ; but, as has
been said, only within the ranks of the governing
class, which in this case practises justice with
sacrifices and abnegations. On the other hand,
to demand equality of rights, as do the Socialists
of the subject caste, is by no means the outcome
of justice, but of covetousness. If you expose
bloody pieces of flesh to a beast, and withdraw
them again, until it finally begins to roar, do
you think that roaring implies justice?



452.

Possession and Justice. — When the Socialists
point out that the division of property at the
present day is the consequence of countless deeds
of injustice and violence, and, in summa, repudiate
obligation to anything with so unrighteous a basis,
they only perceive something isolated. The entire
past of ancient civilisation is built up on violence,
slavery, deception, and error ; we, however, cannot
annul ourselves, the heirs of all these conditions,
nay, the concrescences of all this past, and are
not entitled to demand the withdrawal of a single
fragment thereof. The unjust disposition lurks
also in the souls of non-possessors ; they are not
better than the possessors and have no moral
prerogative ; for at one time or another their
ancestors have been possessors. Not forcible
new distributions, but gradual transformations of
opinion are necessary; justice in all matters must
"become greater, the instinct of violence weaker.



328



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUaiAN.



453.



The Helmsman of the Passions. — The
statesman excites public passions in order to have
the advantage of the counter-passions thereby
aroused. To give an example : a German states-
man knows quite well that the Catholic Church
will never have the same plans as Russia ; indeed,
that it would far rather be allied with the Turks
than with the former country ; he likewise knows
that Germany is threatened with great danger
from an alliance between France and Russia. If
he can succeed, therefore, in making France the
focus and fortress of the Catholic Church, he has
averted this danger for a lengthy period. He
has, accordingly, an interest in showing hatred
against the Catholics in transforming, by all kinds
of hostility, the supporters of the Pope's authority
into an impassioned political power which is
opposed to German politics, and must, as a matter
of course, coalesce with France as the adversary
of Germany ; his aim is the catholicising of France,
just as necessarily as Mirabeau saw the salvation
of his native land in de-catholicising it. The one
State, therefore, desires to muddle millions of
minds of another State in order to gain advantage
thereby. It is the same disposition which supports
the republican form of government of a neighbour-
ing State — le dhordre organise, as Mdrim^e says
— for the sole reason that it assumes that this
form of government makes the nation weaker,
more distracted, less fit for war.



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 329

454.

The Dangerous Revolutionary Spirits. —
Those who are bent on revolutionising society
may be divided into those who seek something
for themselves thereby and those who seek some-
thing for their children and grandchildren. The
latter are the more dangerous, for they have the
belief and the good conscience of disinterestedness.
The others can be appeased by favours : those in
power are still sufficiently rich and wise to adopt
that expedient. The danger begins as soon as
the aims become impersonal ; revolutionists seek-
ing impersonal interests may consider all defenders
of the present state of things as personally in-
terested, and may therefore feel themselves superior
to their opponents.

455.
The Political Value of Paternity. — When
a man has no sons he has not a full right to join
in a discussion concerning the needs of a particular
community. A person must himself have staked
his dearest object along with the others : that
alone binds him fast to the State ; he must have
in view the well-being of his descendants, and
must, therefore, above all, have descendants in
order to take a right and natural share in all
institutions and the changes thereof. The develop-
ment of higher morality depends on a person's
having sons ; it disposes him to be unegoistic,
or, more correctly, it extends his egoism in its
duration and permits him earnestly to strive after
goals which lie beyond his individual lifetime.



33C>



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



45<5.

Pride of Descent. — A man may be justly
proud of an unbroken line of good ancestors down
to his father, — not however of the line itself, for
every one has that. Descent from good ancestors
constitutes the real nobility of birth ; a single
break in the chain, one bad ancestor, therefore,
destroys the nobility of birth. Every one who
talks about his nobility should be asked : " Have
you no violent, avaricious, dissolute, wicked, cruel
man amongst your ancestors ? " If with good
cognisance and conscience he can answer No, then
let his friendship be sought.



457.

Slaves and Labourers. — The fact that we
regard the gratification of vanity as of more
account than all other forms of well-being
(security, position, and pleasures of all sorts), is
shown to a ludicrous extent by every one wishing
for the abolition of slavery and utterly abhorring
to put any one into this position (apart altogether
from political reasons), while every one must ac-
knowledge to himself that in all respects slaves
live more securely and more happily than modern
labourers, and that slave labour is very easy
labour compared with that of the " labourer." We
protest in the name of the " dignity of man " ; but,
expressed more simply, that is just our darling
vanity which feels non-equality, and inferiority
in public estimation, to be the hardest lot of all.



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 33 1

The cynic thinks differently concerning the matter,
because he despises honour : — and so Diogenes
was for some time a slave and tutor.

458.

Leading Minds and their Instruments. —
We see that great statesmen, and in general all
who have to employ many people to carry out
their plans, sometimes proceed one way and
sometimes another ; they either choose with great
skill and care the people suitable for their plans,
and then leave them a comparatively large
amount of liberty, because they know that the
nature of the persons selected impels them pre-
cisely to the point where they themselves would
have them go ; or else they choose badly, in fact
take whatever comes to hand, but out of every
piece of clay they form something useful for their
purpose. These latter minds are the more high-
handed ; they also desire more submissive instru-
ments ; their knowledge of mankind is usually
much smaller, their contempt of mankind greater
than in the case of the first mentioned class, but
the machines they construct generally work better
than the machines from the workshops of the former.

459.

Arbitrary Law Necessary. — Jurists dis-
pute whether the most perfectly thought-out law
or that which is most easily understood should
prevail in a nation. The former, the best model
of which is Roman Law, seems incomprehensible



332



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



i

res-«



to the layman, and is therefore not the expres-
sion of his sense of justice. Popular laws, the
Germanic, for instance, have been rude, supersti-
tious, illogical, and in part idiotic, but they
represented very definite, inherited national morals
and sentiments. But where, as with us, law is
no longer custom, it can only command and be
compulsion ; none of us any longer possesses a
traditional sense of justice ; we must therefore
content ourselves with arbitrary laws, which are
the expressions of the necessity that there must
be law. The most logical is then in any case the
most acceptable, because it is the most impartial^
granting even that in every case the smallest unit
of measure in the relation of crime and punish-
ment is arbitrarily fixed.



460.

The Great Man of the Masses. — Thei
recipe for what the masses call a great man is |
easily given. In all circumstances let a person 1
provide them with something very pleasant, or]
first let him put it into their heads that this orj
that would be very pleasant, and then let him
give it to them. On no account give it immediA
ately, however: but let him acquire it by thej
greatest exertions, or seem thus to acquire it.
The masses must have the impression that there]
is a powerful, nay indomitable strength of willj
operating; at least it must seem to be there
operating. Everybody admires a strong will,
because nobody possesses it, and everybody sayS;



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 333

to himself that if he did possess it there would
no longer be any bounds for him and his egoism.
If, then, it becomes evident that such a strong will
effects something very agreeable to the masses,
instead of hearkening to the wishes of covetous-
ness, people admire once more, and wish good
luck to themselves. Moreover, if he has all the
qualities of the masses, they are the less ashamed
before him, and he is all the more popular.
Consequently, he may be violent, envious,
rapacious, intriguing, flattering, fawning, inflated,
and, according to circumstances, anything what-
soever.

461.

Prince and God. — People frequently com-
mune with their princes in the same way as with
their God, as indeed the prince himself was
frequently the Deity's representative, or at least
His high priest. This almost uncanny disposition
of veneration, disquiet, and shame, grew, and has
grown, much weaker, but occasionally it flares up
again, and fastens upon powerful persons generally.
The cult of genius is an echo of this veneration
of Gods and Princes. Wherever an effort is
made to exalt particular men to the superhuman,
there is also a tendency to regard whole grades
of the population as coarser and baser than they
really are.

462.

My Utopia. — In a better arranged society
the heavy work and trouble of life will be assigned
to those who suffer least through it, to the most



334



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



1



obtuse, therefore; and so step by step up to
those who are most sensitive to the highest and
sublimest kinds of suffering, and who therefore still
suffer notwithstanding the greatest alleviations
of life.

463.

A Delusion in Subversive Doctrines.—
There are political and social dreamers who
ardently and eloquently call for the overthrow
of all order, in the belief that the proudest fane
of beautiful humanity will then rear itself im-
mediately, almost of its own accord. In these
dangerous dreams there is still an echo of
Rousseau's superstition, which believes in a
marvellous primordial goodness of human nature,
buried up, as it were ; and lays all the blame of
that burying-up on the institutions of civilisation,
on society. State, and education. Unfortunately,
it is well known by historical experiences that
every such overthrow reawakens into new life
the wildest energies, the long-buried horrors and
extravagances of remotest ages ; that an over-
throw, therefore, may possibly be a source of
strength to a deteriorated humanity, but never
a regulator, architect, artist, or perfecter of human
nature. It was not Voltaire's moderate nature,
inclined towards regulating, purifying, and recon-
structing, but Rousseau's passionate follies and half-
lies that aroused the optimistic spirit of the Revolu-
tion, against which I cry, " Ecrasez rinfdme!'*
Owing to this the Spirit of enlightenment and
progressive development has been long scared



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 335

away ; let us see — each of us individually — if it
is not possible to recall it !

464.

Moderation. — When perfect resoluteness in
thinking and investigating, that is to say, freedom
of spirit, has become a feature of character, it
produces moderation of conduct ; for it weakens
avidity, attracts much extant energy for the
furtherance of intellectual aims, and shows the
semi-usefulness, or uselessness and danger, of all
sudden changes.

465.

The Resurrection of the Spirit. — A
nation usually renews its youth on a political
sick-bed, and there finds again the spirit which
it had gradually lost in seeking and maintaining
power. Culture is indebted most of all to
politically weakened periods

466.

New Opinions in the Old Home. — The
overthrow of opinions is not immediately followed
by the overthrow of institutions ; on the contrary,
the new opinions dwell for a long time in the
desolate and haunted house of their predecessors,
and conserve it even for want of a habitation.

467.

Public Education. — In large States public
education will always be extremely mediocre, for



336



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the same reason that in large kitchens the cook-
ing is at best only mediocre.

468.

Innocent Corruption. — In all institutions
into which the sharp breeze of public criticism
does not penetrate an innocent corruption grows
up like a fungus (for instance, in learned bodies
and senates).

469.

Scholars as Politicians. — To scholars who
become politicians the comic role is usually
assigned ; they have to be the good conscience
of a state policy.

470.

The Wolf hidden behind the Sheep. —
Almost every politician, in certain circumstances,
has such need of an honest man that he breaks
into the sheep-fold like a famished wolf; not,
however, to devour a stolen sheep, but to hide
himself behind its woolly back.



471.

Happy Times. — A happy age is no longer
possible, because men only wish for it but do not
desire to have it ; and each individual, when good
days come for him, learns positively to pray for
disquiet and misery. The destiny of mankind is
arranged for happy moments — every life has such |
— but not for happy times. Nevertheless, such
times will continue to exist in man's imagination



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 337

as " over the hills and far away," an heirloom of
his earliest ancestors ; for the idea of the happy-
age, from the earliest times to the present, has no
doubt been derived from the state in which man,
after violent exertions in hunting and warfare,
gives himself over to repose, stretches out his
limbs, and hears the wings of sleep rustle around
him. It is a false conclusion when, in accordance
with that old habit, man imagines that after whole
periods of distress and trouble he will be able also
to enjoy the state of happiness in proportionate
increase and duration.



472.

Religion and Government. — So long as
the State, or, more properly, the Government,
regards itself as the appointed guardian of a
number of minors, and on their account considers
the question whether religion should be preserved
or abolished, it is highly probable that it will
always decide for the preservation thereof. For
religion satisfies the nature of the individual in
times of loss, destitution, terror, and distrust, in
cases, therefore, where the Government feels itself
incapable of doing anything directly for the miti-
gation of the spiritual sufferings of the individual ;
indeed, even in general unavoidable and next to
inevitable evils (famines, financial crises, and
wars) religion gives to the masses an attitude of
tranquillity and confiding expectancy. Whenever
the necessary or accidental deficiencies of the
State Government, or the dangerous consequences

VOL. I. Y



338



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



of dynastic interests, strike the eyes of the^
intelligent and make them refractory, the un-
intelligent will only think they see the finger of]
God therein and will submit with patience to the]
dispensations from on high (a conception in which!
divine and human modes of government usually
coalesce) ; thus internal civil peace and continuity
of development will be preserved. The power,!
which lies in the unity of popular feeling, in the
existence of the same opinions and aims for all,
is protected and confirmed by religion, — the rare
cases excepted in which a priesthood cannot agree]
with the State about the price, and therefore
comes into conflict with it. As a rule the State]
will know how to win over the priests, because
it needs their most private and secret system for
educating souls, and knows how to value servants]
who apparently, and outwardly, represent quite]
other interests. Even at present no power can
become " legitimate " without the assistance of j
the priests ; a fact which Napoleon understood, j
Thus, absolutely paternal government and the]
careful preservation of religion necessarily go]
hand-in -hand. In this connection it must be
taken for granted that the rulers and governing]
classes are enlightened concerning the advantages]
which religion affords, and consequently feel them-
selves to a certain extent superior to it, inasmuch ;
as they use it as a means ; thus freedom of spirit
has its origin here. But how will it be when
the totally different interpretation of the idea of]
Government, such as is taught in democratic^
States, begins to prevail? When one sees in it]



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 339

nothing but the instrument of the popular will,
no " upper " in contrast to an " under," but merely a
function of the sole sovereign, the people ? Here
also only the same attitude which the people
assume towards religion can be assumed by the
Government ; every diffusion of enlightenment
will have to find an echo even in the repre-
sentatives, and the utilising and exploiting of
religious impulses and consolations for State
purposes will not be so easy (unless powerful
party leaders occasionally exercise an influence
resembling that of enlightened despotism). When,
however, the State is not permitted to derive any
further advantage from religion, or when people
think far too variously on religious matters to
allow the State to adopt a consistent and uniform
procedure with respect to them, the way out of
the difficulty will necessarily present itself, namely
to treat religion as a private affair and leave it
to the conscience and custom of each single
individual. The first result of all is that religious
feeling seems to be strengthened, inasmuch as
hidden and suppressed impulses thereof, which
the State had unintentionally or intentionally
stifled, now break forth and rush to extremes ;
later on, however, it is found that religion is over-
grown with sects, and that an abundance of
dragon's teeth were sown as soon as religion
was made a private affair. The spectacle of
strife, and the hostile laying bare of all the
weaknesses of religious confessions, admit finally
of no other expedient except that every better
and more talented person should make irreligious-



340



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



ness his private affair, a sentiment which now
obtains the upper hand even in the minds of
the governing classes, and, almost against their
will, gives an anti-religious character to their
nleasures. As soon as this happens, the sentiment
of persons still religiously disposed, who formerly
adored the State as something half sacred or
wholly sacred, changes into decided hostility to
the State ; they lie in wait for governmental
measures, seeking to hinder, thwart, and disturb
as much as they can, and, by the fury of their
contradiction, drive the opposing parties, the irre-
ligious ones, into an almost fanatical enthusiasm
for the State ; in connection with which there is
also the silently co-operating influence, that since
their separation from religion the hearts of persons
in these circles are conscious of a void, and seek
by devotion to the State to provide themselves
provisionally with a substitute for religion, a kind
of stuffing for the void. After these perhaps
lengthy transitional struggles, it is finally decided
whether the religious parties are still strong
enough to revive an old condition of things, and
turn the wheel backwards : in which case en-
lightened despotism (perhaps less enlightened and
more timorous than formerly), inevitably gets the
State into its hands, — or whether the non-religious
parties achieve their purpose, and, possibly through
schools and education, check the increase of their
opponents during several generations, and finally
make them no longer possible. Then, however,
their enthusiasm for the State also abates : it
always becomes more obvious that along with the



L



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 34 1

religious adoration which regards the State as a
mystery and a supernatural institution, the reverent
and pious relation to it has also been convulsed.
Henceforth individuals see only that side of the
State which may be useful or injurious to them,
and press forward by all means to obtain an
influence over it. But this rivalry soon becomes
too great ; men and parties change too rapidly,
and throw each other down again too furiously
from the mountain when they have only just
succeeded in getting aloft. All the measures
which such a Government carries out lack the
guarantee of permanence ; people then fight shy
of undertakings which would require the silent
growth of future decades or centuries to produce
ripe fruit. Nobody henceforth feels any other
obligation to a law than to submit for the moment
to the power which introduced the law ; people
immediately set to work, however, to undermine
it by a new power, a newly-formed majority.
Finally — it may be confidently asserted — the
distrust of all government, the insight into the
useless and harassing nature of these short-
winded struggles, must drive men to an entirely
new resolution : to the abrogation of the con-
ception of the State and the abolition of the
contrast of " private and public." Private concerns
gradually absorb the business of the State ; even
the toughest residue which is left over from the
old work of governing (the business, for instance,
which is meant to protect private persons from
private persons) will at last some day be managed
by private enterprise. The neglect, decline, and



342 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

death of the State, the liberation of the private
person (I am careful not to say the individual),
are the consequences of the democratic conception
of the State ; that is its mission. When it
has accomplished its task, — which, like every-
thing human, involves much rationality and
irrationality, — and when all relapses into the old
malady have been overcome, then a new leaf in
the story-book of humanity will be unrolled, on
which readers will find all kinds of strange tales
and perhaps also some amount of good. To
repeat shortly what has been said : the interests
of the tutelary Government and the interests of
religion go hand-in-hand, so that when the latter
begins to decay the foundations of the State are
also shaken. The belief in a divine regulation of
political affairs, in a mystery in the existence of
the State, is of religious origin : if religion dis-
appears, the State will inevitably lose its old veil
of Isis, and will no longer arouse veneration. The
sovereignty of the people, looked at closely, serves
also to dispel the final fascination and supersti-
tion in the realm of these sentiments ; modern
democracy is the historical form of the decay of
the State. The outlook which results from this
certain decay is not, however, unfortunate in
every respect ; the wisdom and the selfishness of
men are the best developed of all their qualities ;
when the State no longer meets the demands of
these impulses, chaos will least of all result, but a
still more appropriate expedient than the State
will get the mastery over the State. How many
organising forces have already been seen to die



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 343

out ! For example, that of the gens or clan
which for millennia was far mightier than the
power of the family, and indeed already ruled and
regulated long before the latter existed. We our-
selves see the important notions of the right and
might of the family, which once possessed the
supremacy as far as the Roman system extended,
always becoming paler and feebler. In the same
way a later generation will also see the State
become meaningless in certain parts of the world,
— an idea which many contemporaries can hardly
contemplate without alarm and horror. To labour
for the propagation and realisation of this idea is,
certainly, another thing; one must think very
presumptuously of one's reason, and only half
understand history, to set one's hand to the
plough at present — when as yet no one can show
us the seeds that are afterwards to be sown upon
the broken soil. Let us, therefore, trust to the
" wisdom and selfishness of men " that the State
may yet exist a good while longer, and that the
destructive attempts of over-zealous, too hasty
sciolists may be in vain !

473.

Socialism, with Regard to its Means. —
Socialism is the fantastic younger brother of
almost decrepit despotism, which it wants to suc-
ceed ; its efforts are, therefore, in the deepest
sense reactionary. For it desires such an amount
of State power as only despotism has possessed,
—indeed, it outdoes all the past, in that it



344



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



aims at the complete annihilation of the indi-
vidual, whom it deems an unauthorised luxury
of nature, which is to be improved by it into an
appropriate organ of the general community. Owing
to its relationship, it always appears in proximity
to excessive developments of power, like the old
typical socialist, Plato, at the court of the Sicilian
tyrant ; it desires (and under certain circumstances
furthers) the Caesarian despotism of this century,
because, as has been said, it would like to become
its heir. But even this inheritance would not
suffice for its objects, it requires the most sub-
missive prostration of all citizens before the
absolute State, such as has never yet been realised ;
and as it can no longer even count upon the old
religious piety towards the State, but must rather
strive involuntarily and continuously for the
abolition thereof, — because it strives for the aboli-
tion of all existing States, — it can only hope for
existence occasionally, here and there for short
periods, by means of the extremest terrorism. It
is therefore silently preparing itself for reigns of
terror, and drives the word " justice " like a nail
into the heads of the half-cultured masses in order
to deprive them completely of their understanding
(after they had already suffered seriously from the
half-culture), and to provide them with a good
conscience for the bad game they are to play.
Socialism may serve to teach, very brutally and
impressively, the danger of all accumulations of
State power, and may serve so far to inspire dis-
trust of the State itself When its rough voice
strikes up the way-cry " as much State as possible"



1



A GLANCE AT THE STATE.



345



the shout at first becomes louder than ever, — but
soon the opposition cry also breaks forth, with so
much greater force : " as little State as possible^



474.

The Development of the Mind Feared
BY the State. — The Greek polls wa s,Jike_everv
organising political po wer, exclusiv e and distrust-
ful of the growth of culture ; its powerful funda-

" mental impulse seemed almost sotely to ' have^lt
paralysing and obstructive effect thereon. It did

""not want to let any hijtory or any becoming have

-a^laceT^ircuTture ; the education laid d own In th^g
State laws wasmeant to be obligatory on ''all
fenerations to keep them at tf«7 stage of develop-
ment. Plato also, later on, did not Hesi?e~it~t5"Be
otEerwis e in his ideal S tate. I n sp ite of the polls
duItijxe-deYflnpp:d. itself in This manner \ indireotly^^
Jq be sure, and against its will, th e polis furnished
a ssistanc e b ecause the ambition of individuals
t herein was stimulate d to the utmost, so that,
having once found Uie^ath of IHteUectual develop-

^ent, they fo llowed ttto^its farthest extremity ^

be made to



On the other hand, appeal should-j

"^?_£%"^?y*'i^--5f-??li^?§L fo^ ^^ ^s only a great
optimistic dream about the alleged necessary con-
nectionj3£tB[een_the FoTIs" and Athenian~^culture ;
immediately before the night fell over Atjiens (the

* jjlague "and the breakdown of tradition.)y_Xhu£yr
di des makes this culture flash up once more likg^
a transfiguring afterglow, to efface the remem-

"bran ce of th e e vil day tharhad" preceded^



ir



346



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



475.

European Man and the Destruction of
Nationalities. — Commerce and industry, inter-
change of books and letters, the universality of all
higher culture, the rapid changing of locality and
landscape, and the present nomadic life of all who
are not landowners, — these circumstances neces-
sarily bring with them a weakening, and finally a
destruction of nationalities, at least of European
nationalities ; so that, in consequence of perpetual
crossings, there must arise out of them all a
mixed race, that of the European man. At
present the isolation of nations, through the rise
of national enmities, consciously or unconsciously
counteracts this tendency ; but nevertheless the
process of fusing advances slowly, in spite of
those occasional counter-currents. This artificial
nationalism is, however, as dangerous as was
artificial Catholicism, for it is essentially an un-
natural condition of extremity and martial law,
which has been proclaimed by the few over the
many, and requires artifice, lying, and force to
maintain its reputation. It is not the interests of
the many (of the peoples), as they probably say,
but it is first of all the interests of certain
princely dynasties, and then of certain commercial
and social classes, which impel to this nationalism ;
once we have recognised this fact, we should just
fearlessly style o\xrs&\ves good Europeans and labour
actively for the amalgamation of nations ; in which
efforts Germans may assist by virtue of their
hereditary position as interpreters and intermediaries



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 347

between nations. By the way, the great problem
of the Jews only exists within the national States,
inasmuch as their energy and higher intelligence,
their intellectual and volitional capital, accumulated
from generation to generation in tedious schools
of suffering, must necessarily attain to universal
supremacy here to an extent provocative of envy
and hatred ; so that the literary misconduct is
becoming prevalent in almost all modern nations
— and all the more so as they again set up to be
national — of sacrificing the Jews as the scape-
goats of all possible public and private abuses.
So soon as it is no longer a question of the
preservation or establishment of nations, but of
the production and training of a European mixed-
race of the greatest possible strength, the Jew is
just as useful and desirable an ingredient as any
other national remnant. Every nation, every
individual, has unpleasant and even dangerous
qualities, — it is cruel to require that the Jew
should be an exception. Those qualities may even
be dangerous and frightful in a special degree in
his case ; and perhaps the young Stock-Exchange
Jew is in general the most repulsive invention of
the human species. Nevertheless, in a general
summing up, I should like to know how much
must be excused in a nation which, not without
blame on the part of all of us, has had the most
mournful history of all nations, and to which we
owe the most loving of men (Christ), the most
upright of sages (Spinoza), the mightiest book,
and the most effective moral law in the world ?
Moreover, in the darkest times of the Middle



348 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Ages, when Asiatic clouds had gathered darkly
over Europe, it was Jewish free-thinkers, scholars,
and physicians who upheld the banner of en-
lightenment and of intellectual independence under
the severest personal sufferings, and defended
Europe against Asia ; we owe it not least to their
efforts that a more natural, more reasonable, at all
events un-mythical, explanation of the world was
finally able to get the upper hand once more, and
that the link of culture which now unites us with
the enlightenment of Greco-Roman antiquity has
remained unbroken. If Christianity has done
everything to orientalise the Occident, Judaism
has assisted essentially in occidentalising it anew ;
which, in a certain sense, is equivalent to making
Europe's mission and history a continuation of
that of Greece,

476.

Apparent Superiority of the Middle
Ages. — The Middle Ages present in the Church
an institution with an absolutely universal aim,
involving the whole of humanity, — an aim,
moreover, which — presumedly — concerned man's
highest interests ; in comparison therewith the aims
of the States and nations which modern history
exhibits make a painful impression ; they seem
petty, base, material, and restricted in extent.
But this different impression on our imagination
should certainly not determine our judgment ; for
that universal institution corresponded to feigned
and fictitiously fostered needs, such as the need of
salvation, which, wherever they did not already



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 349

exist, it had first of all to create : the new
institutions, however, relieve actual distresses ; and
the time is coming when institutions will arise to
minister to the common, genuine needs of all
men, and to cast that fantastic prototype, the
Catholic Church, into shade and oblivion.



477.

War Indispensable. — It is nothing but
fanaticism and beautiful soulism to expect very
much (or even, much only) from humanity when
it has forgotten how to wage war. For the
present we know of no other means whereby the
rough energy of the camp, the deep impersonal
hatred, the cold-bloodedness of murder with a good
conscience, the general ardour of the system in the
destruction of the enemy, the proud indifference
to great losses, to one's own existence and that
of one's friends, the hollow, earthquake-like con-
vulsion of the soul, can be as forcibly and certainly
communicated to enervated nations as is done by
every great war : owing to the brooks and streams
that here break forth, which, certainly, sweep stones
and rubbish of all sorts along with them and
destroy the meadows of delicate cultures, the
mechanism in the workshops of the mind is
afterwards, in favourable circumstances, rotated by
new power. Culture can by no means dispense
with passions, vices, and malignities. When the
Romans, after having become Imperial, had grown
rather tired of war, they attempted to gain new
strength by beast-baitings, gladiatoral combats,



350 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and Christian persecutions. The English of to-
day, who appear on the whole to have also
renounced war, adopt other means in order to
generate anew those vanishing forces ; namely, the
dangerous exploring expeditions, sea voyages
and mountaineerings, nominally undertaken for
scientific purposes, but in reality to bring home
surplus strength from adventures and dangers of
all kinds. Many other such substitutes for war [
will be discovered, but perhaps precisely thereby
it will become more and more obvious that such
a highly cultivated and therefore necessarily
enfeebled humanity as that of modern Europe
not only needs wars, but the greatest and most
terrible wars, — consequently occasional relapses
into barbarism, — lest, by the means of culture, it
should lose its culture and its very existence.

478.

Industry in the South and the North.
— Industry arises in two entirely different ways.
The artisans of the South are not industrious
because of acquisitiveness but because of the
constant needs of others. The smith is in-
dustrious because some one is always coming
who wants a horse shod or a carriage mended.
If nobody came he would loiter about in the
market-place. In a fruitful land he has little
trouble in supporting himself, for that purpose
he requires only a very small amount of work,
certainly no industry; eventually he would beg
and be contented. The industry of English



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 35 1

workmen, on the contrary, has acquisitiveness
behind it ; it is conscious of itself and its aims ;
with property it wants power, and with power the
greatest possible liberty and individual distinction.



479.

Wealth as the Origin of a Nobility of
Race. — Wealth necessarily creates an aristocracy
of race, for it permits the choice of the most
beautiful women and the engagement of the
best teachers ; it allows a man cleanliness, time
for physical exercises, and, above all, immunity
from dulling physical labour. So far it provides
all the conditions for making man, after a few
generations, move and even act nobly and
handsomely: greater freedom of character and
absence of niggardliness, of wretchedly petty
matters, and of abasement before bread-givers.
It is precisely these negative qualities which are
the most profitable birthday gift, that of happiness,
for the young man ; a person who is quite poor
usually comes to grief through nobility of dis-
position, he does not get on, and acquires nothing,
his race is not capable of living. In this con-
nection, however, it must be remembered that
wealth produces almost the same effects whether
one have three hundred or thirty thousand thalers
a year ; there is no further essential progression
of the favourable conditions afterwards. But to
have less, to beg in boyhood and to abase one's
self is terrible, although it may be the proper
starting-point for such as seek their happiness



352 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

in the splendour of courts, in subordination to
the mighty and influential, or for such as wish
to be heads of the Church. (It teaches how to
slink crouching into the underground passages
to favour.)

480.

Envy and Inertia in Different Courses.
— The two opposing parties, the socialist and the
national, — or whatever they may be called in the
different countries of Europe, — are worthy of each
other ; envy and laziness are the motive powers in
each of them. In the one camp they desire to
work as little as possible with their hands, in the
other as little as possible with their heads ; in
the latter they hate and envy prominent, self-
evolving individuals, who do not willingly allow
themselves to be drawn up in rank and file for
the purpose of a collective effect ; in the former
they hate and envy the better social caste, which
is more favourably circumstanced outwardly,
whose peculiar mission, the production of the
highest blessings of culture, makes life inwardly
all the harder and more painful. Certainly, if
it be possible to make the spirit of the collective
effect the spirit of the higher classes of society,
the socialist crowds are quite right, when they
also seek outward equalisation between them-
selves and these classes, since they are certainly
internally equalised with one another already in
head and heart. Live as higher men, and always
do the deeds of higher culture, — thus everything
that lives will acknowledge your right, and the



A GLANCE AT THE STATE. 353

order of society, whose summit ye are, will be
safe from every evil glance and attack !



481.

High Politics and their Detriments. —
Just as a nation does not suffer the greatest
losses that war and readiness for war involve
through the expenses of the war, or the stoppage
of trade and traffic, or through the maintenance
of a standing army, — however great these losses
may now be, when eight European States expend
yearly the sum of five milliards of marks thereon,
— but owing to the fact that year after year its
ablest, strongest, and most industrious men are
withdrawn in extraordinary numbers from their
proper occupations and callings to be turned into
soldiers : in the same way, a nation that sets
about practising high politics and securing a
decisive voice among the great Powers does not
suffer its greatest losses where they are usually
supposed to be. In fact, from this time onward
it constantly sacrifices a number of its most
conspicuous talents upon the " Altar of the
Fatherland " or of national ambition, whilst
formerly other spheres of activity were open to
those talents which are now swallowed up by
politics. But apart from these public hecatombs,
and in reality much more horrible, there is a
drama which is constantly being performed
simultaneously in a hundred thousand acts ; every
able, industrious, intellectually striving man of
a nation that thus covets political laurels, is



354 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



^1



ii



swayed by this covetousness, and no longer
belongs entirely to himself alone as he did
formerly; the new daily questions and cares of
the public welfare devour a daily tribute of the
intellectual and emotional capital of every citizen ;
the sum of all these sacrifices and losses of
individual energy and labour is so enormous,
that the political growth of a nation almost
necessarily entails an intellectual impoverishment l
and lassitude, a diminished capacity for the f '
performance of works that require great concen-
tration and specialisation. The question may
finally be asked : " Does it then pay, all this
bloom and magnificence of the total (which
indeed only manifests itself as the fear of the
new Colossus in other nations, and as the com-
pulsory favouring by them of national trade and.
commerce) when all the nobler, finer, and more
intellectual plants and products, in which its soil
was hitherto so rich, must be sacrificed to this
coarse and opalescent flower of the nation ? *

482.

Repeated Once More. — Public opinion— j
private laziness.



* This is once more an allusion to modem Germany.
—J M. K.



NINTH DIVISION.
MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF.

483.
The Enemies of Truth. — Convictions are more
dangerous enemies of truth than lies.

484.

A ToPSY-TuRVY World. — We criticise a
thinker more severely when he puts an unpleasant
statement before us ; and yet it would be more
reasonable to do so when we find his statement
pleasant.

485.

Decided Character. — A man far oftener ap-
pears to have a decided character from persistently
following his temperament than from persistently
following his principles.



486.

The One Thing Needful. — One thing a
man must have : either a naturally light disposition
or a disposition lightened by art and knowledge.



356 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



487.



11




The Passion for Things. — Whoever sets his >
passion on things (sciences, arts, the common weal, ifl
the interests of culture) withdraws much fervour
from his passion for persons (even when they
are the representatives of those things ; as states-
men, philosophers, and artists are the representa-
tives of their creations).

488. )

Calmness in Action. — As a cascade in its
descent becomes more deliberate and suspended,
so the great man of action usually acts with more
calmness than his strong passions previous to
action would lead one to expect.

489.

Not too Deep. — Persons who grasp a matter j
in all its depth seldom remain permanently true
to it. They have just brought the depth up into
the light, and there is always much evil to be seen .
there.

490.

The Illusion of Idealists. — All idealists
imagine that the cause which they serve is
essentially better than all other causes, and will
not believe that if their cause is really to flourish
it requires precisely the same evil-smelling manure
which all other human undertakings have need of.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 357

491.

Self-Observation. — Man is exceedingly
well protected from himself and guarded against
his self-exploring and self-besieging ; as a rule he
can perceive nothing of himself but his outworks.
The actual fortress is inaccessible, and even in-
visible, to him, unless friends and enemies become
traitors and lead him inside by secret paths.

492.

The Right Calling. — Men can seldom hold
on to a calling unless they believe or persuade
themselves that it is really more important than any
other. Women are the same with their lovers.

493.

Nobility of Disposition. — Nobility of dis-
position consists largely in good-nature and
absence of distrust, and therefore contains precisely
that upon which money-grabbing and successful
men take a pleasure in walking with superiority
and scorn.

494.

Goal and Path. — Many are obstinate with
regard to the once-chosen path, few with regard
to the goal.

495-

The Offensiveness in an Individual Way
OF Life. — All specially individual lines of con-
duct excite irritation against him who adopts
them ; people feel themselves reduced to the



358 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

level of commonplace creatures by the extra-
ordinary treatment he bestows on himself.



496.

The Privilege of Greatness. — It is the
privilege of greatness to confer intense happiness
with insignificant gifts.

497.

Unintentionally Noble. — A personbehaves
with unintentional nobleness when he has accus-
tomed himself to seek naught from others and
always to give to them.

498.

A Condition of Heroism. — When a person
wishes to become a hero, the serpent must previ-
ously have become a dragon, otherwise he lacks
his proper enemy.

499.

Friends. — Fellowship in joy, and not sym-
pathy in sorrow, makes people friends.

500.

Making Use of Ebb and Flow. — For the
purpose of knowledge we must know how to
make use of the inward current which draws us
towards a thing, and also of the current which
after a time draws us away from it.



ft



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 359

501.

Joy in Itself. — " Joy in the Thing " people
say ; but in reality it is joy in itself by means of
the thing.

502.

The Unassuming Man. — He who is unas-
suming towards persons manifests his presumption
all the more with regard to things (town, State,
society, time, humanity). That is his revenge.

503.

Envy and Jealousy. — Envy and jealousy
are the pudenda of the human soul. The com-
parison may perhaps be carried further.

504-

The Noblest Hypocrite. — It is a very noble
hypocrisy not to talk of one's self at all.

SOS-
Vexation. — ^Vexation is a physical disease,
which is not by any means cured when its cause
is subsequently removed.

506.

The Champions of Truth. — Truth does not
find fewest champions when it is dangerous to
speak it, but when it is dull,



36o



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



507.

More Troublesome even than Enemies.
— Persons of whose sympathetic attitude we are
not, in all circumstances, convinced, while for some
reason or other (gratitude, for instance) we are
obliged to maintain the appearance of unqualified
sympathy with them, trouble our imagination
far more than our enemies do.

508.

Free Nature. — We are so fond of being
out among Nature, because it has no opinions
about us.

509.

Each Superior in one Thing. — In civil-
ised intercourse every one feels himself superior to
all others in at least one thing; kindly feelings
generally are based thereon, inasmuch as every one
can, in certain circumstances, render help, and is
therefore entitled to accept help without shame.

510.

Consolatory Arguments. — In the case of
a death we mostly use consolatory arguments not
so much to alleviate the grief as to make excuses
for feeling so easily consoled.



511.

Persons Loyal to their Convictions. —
Whoever is very busy retains his general views
and opinions almost unchanged. So also does



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 361

every one who labours in the service of an idea ;
he will nevermore examine the idea itself, he no
longer has any time to do so ; indeed, it is
against his interests to consider it as still admit-
ting of discussion.

512.

Morality and Quantity. — The higher
morality of one man as compared with that of
another, often lies merely in the fact that his
aims are quantitively greater. The other, living
in a circumscribed sphere, is dragged down by
petty occupations.

513.

" The Life " as the Proceeds of Life. —
A man may stretch himself out ever so far with
his knowledge ; he may seem to himself ever so
objective, but eventually he realises nothing there-
from but his own biography.

514.
Iron Necessity. — Iron necessity is a thing
which has been found, in the course of history, to
be neither iron nor necessary.

515.

From Experience. — The unreasonableness
of a thing is no argument against its existence,
but rather a condition thereof.

516.

Truth. — Nobody dies nowadays of fatal
truths, there are too many antidotes to them.



362 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

517.

A Fundamental Insight. — There is no
pre-established harmony between the promotion
of truth and the welfare of mankind.

518.

Man's Lot. — He who thinks most deeply
knows that he is always in the wrong, however
he may act and decide.

519.

Truth as Circe. — Error has made animals
into men ; is truth perhaps capable of making man
into an animal again ?

520.

The Danger of Our Culture. — We
belong to a period of which the culture is in
danger of being destroyed by the appliances of
culture.

521.

Greatness Means Leading the Way. —
No stream is large and copious of itself, but
becomes great by receiving and leading on so
many tributary streams. It is so, also, with all
intellectual greatnesses. It is only a question of
some one indicating the direction to be followed
by so many affluents ; not whether he was richly
or poorly gifted originally.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 363

522.

A Feeble Conscience. — People who talk
about their importance to mankind have a feeble
conscience for common bourgeois rectitude, keep-
ing of contracts, promises, etc.

523.
Desiring to be Loved. — The demand to be
loved is the greatest of presumptions.

524.

Contempt for Men. — The most unequivocal
sign of contempt for man is to regard everybody
merely as a means to one's own ends, or of no
account whatever.

525.

Partisans through Contradiction. —
Whoever has driven men to fury against himself
has also gained a party in his favour.

526.

Forgetting Experiences. — Whoever thinks
much and to good purpose easily forgets his own
experiences, but not the thoughts which these
experiences have called forth.

527.

Sticking to an Opinion. — One person
sticks to an opinion because he takes pride in
having acquired it himself, — another sticks to it
because he has learnt it with difficulty and is



3^4



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



proud of having understood it ; both of them,
therefore, out of vanity.



528.

Avoiding the Light. — Good deeds avoid the
light just as anxiously as evil deeds ; the latter
fear that pain will result from publicity (as punish-
ment), the former fear that pleasure will vanish
with publicity (the pure pleasure per se, which
ceases as soon as satisfaction of vanity is added
to it).

529.

The Length of the Day.-
much to put into them, a day
pockets.

530.

The Genius of Tyranny.-
cible desire to obtain tyrannical power has been
awakened in the soul, and constantly keeps up
its fervour, even a very mediocre talent (in poli-
ticians, artists, etc.) gradually becomes an almost
irresistible natural force.



-When one has
has a hundred



-When an invin-



531.
The Enemy's Life. — He who lives by fighting
with an enemy has an interest in the preservation
of the enemy's life.*

* This is why Nietzsche pointed out later on that he had
an interest in the preservation of Christianity, and that he
was sure his teaching would not undermine this faith — just
as little as anarchists have undermined kings ; but have left
them seated all the more firmly on their thrones. — J. M. K.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 365

532.

More Important. — Unexplained, obscure
matters are regarded as more important than
explained, clear ones.

533.

Valuation of Services Rendered. — We
estimate services rendered to us according to the
value set on them by those who render them, not
according to the value they have for us.

534.
Unhappiness. — The distinction associated with
unhappiness (as if it were a sign of stupidity, un-
ambitiousness, or commonplaceness to feel happy)
is so great that when any one says to us, " How
happy you are ! " we usually protest.

535-
Imagination in Anguish. — When one is
afraid of anything, one's imagination plays the
part of that evil spirit which springs on one's back
just when one has the heaviest load to bear.

536.
The Value of Insipid Opponents. — We
sometimes remain faithful to a cause merely
because its opponents never cease to be insipid.

537.
The Value of a Profession. — A profession
makes us thoughtless ; that is its greatest blessing.



366



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN



For it is a bulwark behind which we are permitted
to withdraw when commonplace doubts and cares
assail us.

538.

Talent. — Many a man's talent appears less
than it is, because he has always set himself too
heavy tasks.

539-

Youth. — Youth is an unpleasant period ; for
then it is not possible or not prudent to be pro-
ductive in any sense whatsoever.

540.

Too Great Aims. — Whoever aims publicly at
great things and at length perceives secretly that
he is too weak to achieve them, has usually also
insufficient strength to renounce his aims publicly,
and then inevitably becomes a hypocrite.



541.

In the Current. — Mighty waters sweep
many stones and shrubs away with them ; mighty
spirits many foolish and confused minds.

542.

The Dangers of Intellectual Emanci-
pation. — In a seriously intended intellectual
emancipation a person's mute passions and crav-
ings also hope to find their advantage.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 367

543-

The Incarnation of the Mind. — When any
one thinks much and to good purpose, not only
his face but also his body acquires a sage look.

544-

Seeing Badly and Hearing Badly. — The
man who sees little always sees less than there is
to see ; the man who hears badly always hears
something more than there is to hear.

545
Self-Enjoyment in Vanity. — The vain man
does not wish so much to be prominent as to feel
himself prominent ; he therefore disdains none of
the expedients for self-deception and self-out-
witting. It is not the opinion of others that he
sets his heart on, but his opinion of their opinion

546.

Exceptionally Vain. — He who is usually
self-sufficient becomes exceptionally vain, and
keenly alive to fame and praise when he is
physically ill. The more he Toses himself the
more he has to endeavour to regain his position
by means of the opinion of others.

547.

The " Witty." — Those who seek wit do not
possess it.



368 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

548.

A Hint to the Heads of Parties. — When
one can make people publicly support a cause they
have also generally been brought to the point of
inwardly declaring themselves in its favour, be-
cause they wish to be regarded as consistent.

549.

Contempt. — Man is more sensitive to the
contempt of others than to self-contempt.

550.

The Tie of Gratitude. — There are servile
souls who carry so far their sense of obligation for
benefits received that they strangle themselves with
the tie of gratitude.

551.

The Prophet's Knack. — In predicting before-
hand the procedure of ordinary individuals, it must
be taken for granted that they always make use
of the smallest intellectual expenditure in freeing
themselves from disagreeable situations.

552.

Man's Sole Right. — He who swerves from
the traditional is a victim of the unusual ; he who
keeps to the traditional is its slave. The man is
ruined in either case.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 369

553.

Below the Beast. — When a man roars with
laughter he surpasses all the animals by his
vulgarity.

554.

Partial Knowledge. — He who speaks a
foreign language imperfectly has more enjoyment
therein than he who speaks it well. The enjoy-
ment is with the partially initiated.



555.

Dangerous Helpfulness. — There are people
who wish to make human life harder for no other
reason than to be able afterwards to offer men
their life-alleviating recipes — their Christianity, for
example.

556.

INDUSTRIOUSNESS AND CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.
— Industriousness and conscientiousness are often
antagonists, owing to the fact that industrious-
ness wants to pluck the fruit sour from the tree
while conscientiousness wants to let it hang too
long, until it falls and is bruised.



557.

Casting Suspicion. — We endeavour to cast
suspicion on persons whom we cannot endure,

VOL, I, 9A



370



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



558.

The Conditions are Lacking. — Many people
wait all their lives for the opportunity to be good
in their own way.

559-

Lack of Friends. — Lack of friends leads to
the inference that a person is envious or presump-
tuous. Many a man owes his friends merely to the
fortunate circumstance that he has no occasion
for envy.

560.

Danger in Manifoldness. — With one talent
more we often stand less firmly than with one less ;
just as a table stands better on three feet than on
four.

561.

An Exemplar for Others. — Whoever wants
to set a good example must add a grain of folly
to his virtue ; people then imitate their exemplar
and at the same time raise themselves above him,
a thing they love to do.



562.

Being a Target. — The bad things others say
about us are often not really aimed at us, but are
the manifestations of spite or ill-humour occasioned
by quite different causes.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 37 1

563.

Easily Resigned. — We suffer but little on
account of un gratified wishes if we have exercised
our imagination in distorting the past.

564.

In Danger. — One is in greatest danger of
being run over when one has just got out of
the way of a carriage.

565.

The R6le According to the Voice. —
Whoever is obliged to speak louder than he
naturally does (say, to a partially deaf person
or before a large audience), usually exaggerates
what he has to communicate. Many a one
becomes a conspirator, malevolent gossip, or
intriguer, merely because his voice is best suited
for whispering.

566.

Love and Hatred. — Love and hatred are
not blind, but are dazzled by the fire which they
carry about with them.

567.

Advantageously Persecuted. — People who
cannot make their merits perfectly obvious to
the world endeavour to awaken a strong hostility
against themselves. They have then the consola-
tion of thinking that this hostility stands between
their merits and the acknowledgment thereof—



372



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



and that many others think the same thing,
which is very advantageous for their recognition.

568.

Confession. — We forget our fault when we
have confessed it to another person, but he does not
generally forget it.

569.

Self-Sufficiency. — The Golden Fleece of
self-sufficiency is a protection against blows, but
not against needle-pricks.

570.

Shadows in the Flame. — The flame is not
so bright to itself as to those whom it illuminates,
— so also the wise man.



571.

Our Own Opinions. — The first opinion that
occurs to us when we are suddenly asked about
anything is not usually our own, but only the
current opinion belonging to our caste, position,
or family ; our own opinions seldom float on
the surface.

572.

The Origin of Courage. — The ordinary
man is as courageous and invulnerable as a hero
when he does not see the danger, when he has
no eyes for it. Reversely, the hero has his one
vulnerable spot upon the back, where he has
no eyes.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 373

573.

The Danger in the Physician. — One must
be born for one's physician, otherwise one comes
to grief through him.

574.

Marvellous Vanity. — Whoever has cour-
ageously prophesied the weather three times and
has been successful in his hits, acquires a certain
amount of inward confidence in his prophetic gift.
We give credence to the marvellous and irrational
when it flatters our self-esteem.

575.

A Profession. — A profession is the backbone
of life.

576.

The Danger of Personal Influence. —
Whoever feels that he exercises a great inward
influence over another person must give him a
perfectly free rein, must, in fact, welcome and
even induce occasional opposition, otherwise he
will inevitably make an enemy.

577-

Recognition of the Heir. — Whoever has
founded something great in an unselfish spirit
is careful to rear heirs for his work. It is the
sign of a tyrannical and ignoble nature to see
opponents in all possible heirs, and to live in a
state of self-defence against them.



374 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

578.

Partial Knowledge. — Partial knowledge is
more triumphant than complete knowledge ; it
takes things to be simpler than they are, and
so makes its theory more popular and convincing.

579.

Unsuitable for a Party-Man. — Whoever
thinks much is unsuitable for a party-man ; his
thinking leads him too quickly beyond the party.

580.

A Bad Memory. — The advantage of a bad
memory is that one enjoys several times the
same good things for the first time.

581.

Self-Affliction. — Want of consideration is
often the sign of a discordant inner nature, which
craves for stupefaction.

582.

Martyrs. — The disciples of a martyr suffer
more than the martyr.

583.

Arrears of Vanity. — The vanity of many
people who have no occasion to be vain is the
inveterate habit, still surviving from the time
when people had no right to the belief in them-



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 375

selves and only begged it in small sums from
others.

584.

PuNCTUM Saliens OF PASSION. — A person
falling into a rage or into a violent passion of
love reaches a point when the soul is full like
a hogshead, but nevertheless a drop of water has
still to be added, the good will for the passion
(which is also generally called the evil will).
This item only is necessary, and then the hogs-
head overflows.

585.

A Gloomy Thought. — It is with men as
with the charcoal fires in the forest. It is only
when young men have cooled down and have
got charred, like these piles, that they become
useful. As long as they fume and smoke they
are perhaps more interesting, but they are useless
and too often uncomfortable. Humanity ruthlessly
uses every individual as material for the heating
of its great machines ; but what then is the purpose
of the machines, when all individuals (that is, the
human race) are useful only to maintain them ?
Machines that are ends in themselves : is that the
umana commediaf

586.

The Hour-hand of Life. — Life consists of
rare single moments of the greatest importance,
and of countless intervals during which, at best,
the phantoms of those moments hover around us.
Love, the Spring, every fine melody, the mountains,



376



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the moon, the sea — all speak but once fully to
the heart, if, indeed, they ever do quite attain
to speech. For many people have not those
moments at all, and are themselves intervals and
pauses in the symphony of actual life.

587.

Attack or Compromise. — We often make
the mistake of showing violent enmity towards a
tendency, party, or period, because we happen
only to get a sight of its most exposed side, its
stuntedness, or the inevitable " faults of its virtues,"
— perhaps because we ourselves have taken a
prominent part in them. We then turn our
backs on them and seek a diametrically opposite
course ; but the better way would be to seek out
their strong good sides, or to develop them in
ourselves. To be sure, a keener glance and a
better will are needed to improve the becoming
and the imperfect than are required to see through
it in its imperfection and to deny it.



588.

Modesty. — There is true modesty (that is the
knowledge that we are not the works we create) ;
and it is especially becoming in a great mind,
because such a mind can well grasp the thought
of absolute irresponsibility (even for the good it
creates). People do not hate a great man's pre-
sumptuousness in so far as he feels his strength,
but because he wishes to prove it by injuring



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 377

others, by dominating them, and seeing how long
they will stand it. This, as a rule, is even a proof
of the absence of a secure sense of power, and
makes people doubt his greatness. We must
therefore beware of presumption from the stand-
point of wisdom.

589.

The Day's First Thought. — The best way
to begin a day well is to think, on awakening,
whether we cannot give pleasure during the day
to at least one person. If this could become a
substitute for the religious habit of prayer our
fellow-men would benefit by the change.

590.

Presumption as the Last Consolation. —
When we so interpret a misfortune, an intellectual
defect, or a disease that we see therein our pre-
destined fate, our trial, or the mysterious punish-
ment of our former misdeeds, we thereby make
our nature interesting and exalt ourselves in im-
agination above our fellows. The proud sinner
is a well-known figure in all religious sects.

591.

The Vegetation of Happiness. — Close be-
side the world's woe, and often upon its volcanic
soil, man has laid out his little garden of happiness.
Whether one regard life with the eyes of him
who only seeks knowledge therefrom, or of him
who submits and is resigned, or of him who re-



378



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



joices over surmounted difficulties — everywhere
one will find some happiness springing up beside
the evil — and in fact always the more happiness
the more volcanic the soil has been, — only it
would be absurd to say that suffering itself is
justified by this happiness.



592.

The Path of our Ancestors. — It is sensible
when a person develops still further in himself
the talent upon which his father or grandfather
spent much trouble, and does not shift to some-
thing entirely new ; otherwise he deprives himself
of the possibility of attaining perfection in any
one craft. That is why the proverb says,
" Which road shouldst thou ride ? — That of thine
ancestors."

593-

Vanity and Ambition as Educators. — As
long as a person has not become an instrument
of general utility, ambition may torment him ; if,
however, that point has been reached, if he
necessarily works like a machine for the good of
all, then vanity may result ; it will humanise him
in small matters and make him more sociable,
endurable, and considerate, when ambition has
completed the coarser work of making him
useful.

594-

Philosophical Novices. — Immediately we
have comprehended the wisdom of a philosopher,
we go through the streets with a feeling as if we



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 379

had been re-created and had become great men ;
for we encounter only those who are ignorant of
this wisdom, and have therefore to deliver new and
unknown verdicts concerning everything. Because
we now recognise a law-book we think we must
also comport ourselves as judges.

595.
Pleasing by Displeasing. — People who pre-
fer to attract attention, and thereby to displease,
desire the same thing as those who neither wish
to please nor to attract attention, only they seek
it more ardently and indirectly by means of a
step by which they apparently move away from
their goal. They desire influence and power, and
therefore show their superiority, even to such an
extent that it becomes disagreeable ; for they
know that he who has finally attained power
pleases in almost all he says and does, and that
even when he displeases he still seems to please.
The free spirit also, and in like manner the
believer, desire power, in order some day to please
thereby ; when, on account of their doctrine, evil
fate, persecution, dungeon, or execution threaten
them, they rejoice in the thought that their
teaching will thus be engraved and branded on
the heart of mankind ; though its effect is remote
they accept their fate as a painful but powerful
means of still attaining to power.

596.
Casus Belli and the Like. — The prince
who, for his determination to make war against



38o HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

his neighbour, invents a casus belli, is like a father
who foists on his child a mother who is hence-
forth to be regarded as such. And are not almost
all publicly avowed motives of action just such
spurious mothers?

597.
Passion and Right. — Nobody talks more
passionately of his rights than he who, in the
depths of his soul, is doubtful about them. By
getting passion on his side he seeks to confound
his understanding and its doubts, — he thus obtains
a good conscience, and along with it success with
his fellow-men.

598.

The Trick of the Resigning One. — He
who protests against marriage, after the manner
of Catholic priests, will conceive of it in its lowest
and vulgarest form. In the same way he who
disavows the honour of his contemporaries will
have a mean opinion of it ; he can thus dispense
with it and struggle against it more easily. More-
over, he who denies himself much in great matters
will readily indulge himself in small things. It
might be possible that he who is superior to the
approbation of his contemporaries would never-
theless not deny himself the gratification of small
vanities.

599.

The Years of Presumption. — The proper

period of presumption in gifted people is between

their twenty-sixth and thirtieth years ; it is the

time of early ripeness, with a large residue of



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 38 1

sourness. On the ground of what we feel within
ourselves we demand honour and humility from
men who see little or nothing of it, and because
this tribute is not immediately forthcoming we
revenge ourselves by the look, the gesture of
arrogance, and the tone of voice, which a keen ear
and eye recognise in every product of those years,
whether it be poetry, philosophy, or pictures and
music. Older men of experience smile thereat,
and think with emotion of those beautiful years
in which one resents the fate of being so much
and seeming so little. Later on one really seems
more, — but one has lost the good belief in being
much, — unless one remain for life an incorrigible
fool of vanity.

600.

Deceptive and yet Defensible. — Just as
in order to pass by an abyss or to cross a deep
stream on a plank we require a railing, not to
hold fast by, — for it would instantly break down
with us, — but to give the notion of security to
the eye, so in youth we require persons who
unconsciously render us the service of that
railing. It is true they would not help us if
we really wished to lean upon them in great
danger, but they afford the tranquillising sensation
of protection close to one (for instance, fathers,
teachers, friends, as all three usually are).

601.

Learning to Love, — One must learn to
love, one must learn to be kind, and this from



382



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



childhood onwards; when education and chance
give us no opportunity for the exercise of these
feelings our soul becomes dried up, and even in-
capable of understanding the fine devices of
loving men. In the same way hatred must be
learnt and fostered, when one wants to become
a proficient hater, — otherwise the germ of it will
gradually die out.

602.

Ruin as Ornament. — Persons who pass
through numerous mental phases retain certain
sentiments and habits of their earlier states, which
then project like a piece of inexplicable antiquity
and grey stonework into their new thought and
action, often to the embellishment of the whole
surroundings.

603.

Love and Honour. — Love desires, fear
avoids. That is why one cannot be both loved
and honoured by the same person, at least not
at the same time.* For he who honours recog-
nises power, — that is to say, he fears it, he is in
a state of reverential fear (Ehr-furchf). But love
recognises no power, nothing that divides, detaches,
superordinates, or subordinates. Because it does
not honour them, ambitious people secretly or
openly resent being loved.



* Women never understand this. — J. M. K.



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 383

604.

A Prejudice in Favour of Cold Natures.
— People who quickly take fire grow cold quickly,
and therefore are, on the whole, unreliable. For
those, therefore, who are always cold, or pretend
to be so, there is the favourable prejudice that
they are particularly trustworthy, reliable persons ;
they are confounded with those who take fire
slowly and retain it long.

605.

The Danger in Free Opinions. — Frivolous
occupation with free opinions has a charm, like
a kind of itching; if one yields to it further,
one begins to chafe the places ; until at last an
open, painful wound results ; that is to say,
until the free opinion begins to disturb and
torment us in our position in life and in our
human relations.

606.

Desire for Sore Affliction. — When
passion is over it leaves behind an obscure long-
ing for it, and even in disappearing it casts a
seductive glance at us. It must have afforded
a kind of pleasure to have been beaten with this
scourge. Compared with it, the more moderate
sensations appear insipid ; we still prefer, ap-
parently, the more violent displeasure to languid
delight.



384



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



607.

Dissatisfaction with Others and with
THE World. — When, as so frequently happens,
we vent our dissatisfaction on others when we
are really dissatisfied with ourselves, we are in
fact attempting to mystify and deceive our
judgment ; we desire to find a motive a posteriori
for this dissatisfaction, in the mistakes or de-
ficiencies of others, and so lose sight of ourselves.
Strictly religious people, who have been relentless
judges of themselves, have at the same time
spoken most ill of humanity generally; there has
never been a saint who reserved sin for himself
and virture for others, any more than a man
who, according to Buddha's rule, hides his good
qualities from people and only shows his bad ones.



608.
Confusion of Cause and Effect. — Un-
consciously we seek the principles and opinions
which are suited to our temperament, so that
at last it seems as if these principles and opinions
had formed our character and given it support
and stability, whereas exactly the contrary has
taken place. Our thoughts and judgments are,
apparently, to be taken subsequently as the
causes of our nature, but as a matter of fact our
nature is the cause of our so thinking and judging.
And what induces us to play this almost un-
conscious comedy? Inertness and convenience,
and to a large extent also the vain desire to be
regarded as thoroughly consistent and homo-



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 385

geneous in nature and thought ; for this wins
respect and gives confidence and power.

609.

Age in Relation to Truth. — Young people
love what is interesting and exceptional, indifferent
whether it is truth or falsehood. Riper minds
love what is interesting and extraordinary when
it is truth. Matured minds, finally, love truth
even in those in whom it appears plain and
simple and is found tiresome by ordinary people,
because they have observed that truth is in the
habit of giving utterance to its highest intellectual
verities with all the appearance of simplicity.

610.

Men as Bad Poets. — Just as bad poets seek
a thought to fit the rhyme in the second half
of the verse, so men in the second half of life,
having become more scrupulous, are in the habit
of seeking pursuits, positions, and conditions which
suit those of their earlier life, so that outwardly
all sounds well, but their life is no longer ruled
and continuously determined anew by a powerful
thought : in place thereof there is merely the
intention of finding a rhyme.

611.

Ennui and Play. — Necessity compels us to
work, with the product of which the necessity is
appeased ; the ever new awakening of necessity,
VOL. I. 2B



386



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



however, accustoms us to work. But in the
intervals in which necessity is appeased and
asleep, as it were, we are attacked by ennui.
What is this ? In a word it is the habituation
to work, which now makes itself felt as a new
and additional necessity; it will be all the
stronger the more a person has been accustomed
to work, perhaps, even, the more a person has
suffered from necessities. In order to escape
ennui, a man either works beyond the extent
of his former necessities, or he invents play, that
is to say, work that is only intended to appease
the general necessity for work. He who has
become satiated with play, and has no new
necessities impelling him to work, is sometimes
attacked by the longing for a third state, which
is related to play as gliding is to dancing, as
dancing is to walking, a blessed, tranquil move-
ment ; it is the artists' and philosophers' vision
of happiness.

612.

Lessons from Pictures. — If we look at a
series of pictures of ourselves, from the time of
later childhood to the time of mature man-
hood, we discover with pleased surprise that the
man bears more resemblance to the child than
to the youth : that probably, therefore, in accord-
ance with this fact, there has been in the interval a
temporary alienation of the fundamental character,
over which the collected, concentrated force of the
man has again become master. With this observa-
tion this other is also in accordance, namely, that



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 387

all strong influences of passions, teachers, and
political events, which in our youthful years draw
us hither and thither, seem later on to be referred
back again to a fixed standard ; of course they
still continue to exist and operate within us, but
our fundamental sentiments and opinions have now
the upper hand, and use their influence perhaps as
a source of strength, but are no longer merely
regulative, as was perhaps the case in our twenties.
Thus even the thoughts and sentiments of the
man appear more in accordance with those of his
childish years, — and this objective fact expresses
itself in the above-mentioned subjective fact.

613.

The Tone of Voice of Different Ages. —
The tone in which youths speak, praise, blame,
and versify, displeases an older person because it
is too loud, and yet at the same time dull and
confused like a sound in a vault, which acquires
such a loud ring owing to the emptiness ; for
most of the thought of youths does not gush forth
out of the fulness of their own nature, but is the
accord and the echo of what has been thought,
said, praised or blamed around them. As their
sentiments, however (their inclinations and aver-
sions), resound much more forcibly than the
reasons thereof, there is heard, whenever they
divulge these sentiments, the dull, clanging tone
which is a sign of the absence or scarcity of
reasons. The tone of riper age is rigorous,
abruptly concise, moderately loud, but, like every-



388 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

thing distinctly articulated, is heard very far off.
Old age, finally, often brings a certain mildness
and consideration into the tone of the voice, and
as it were, sweetens it ; in many cases, to be sure
it also sours it.

614

The Atavist and the Forerunner. — The
man of unpleasant character, full of distrust,
envious of the success of fellow-competitors and
neighbours, violent and enraged at divergent
opinions, shows that he belongs to an earlier grade
of culture, and is, therefore, an atavism ; lor the
way in which he behaves to people was right and
suitable only for an age of club-law ; he is an
atavist. The man of a different character, rich in
sympathy, winning friends everywhere, finding all
that is growing and becoming amiable, rejoicing
at the honours and successes of others and
claiming no privilege of solely knowing the truth,
but full of a modest distrust, — he is a forerunner
who presses upward towards a higher human
culture. The man of unpleasant character dates
from the times when the rude basis of human
intercourse had yet to be laid, the other lives on
the upper floor of the edifice of culture, removed
as far as possible from the howling and raging
wild beast imprisoned in the cellars.

615.

Consolation for Hypochondriacs. — When
a great thinker is temporarily subjected to hypo-
chondriacal self-torture he can say to himself, by



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 389

way of consolation : " It is thine own great
strength on which this parasite feeds and grows ;
if thy strength were smaller thou wouldst have
less to suffer." The statesman may say just the
same thing when jealousy and vengeful feeling, or,
in a word, the tone of the bellum omnium contra
omneSy for which, as the representative of a nation,
he must necessarily have a great capacity, occa-
sionally intrudes into his personal relations and
makes his life hard.

616.

Estranged from the Present. — There are
great advantages in estranging one's self for once
to a large extent from one's age, and being as it
were driven back from its shores into the ocean
of past views of things. Looking thence towards
the coast one commands a view, perhaps for the
first time, of its aggregate formation, and when one
again approaches the land one has the advantage
of understanding it better, on the whole, than those
who have never left it.

617.

Sowing and Reaping on the field of Per-
sonal Defects. — Men like Rousseau understand
how to use their weaknesses, defects, and vices as
manure for their talent. When Rousseau bewails
the corruption and degeneration of society as the
evil results of culture, there is a personal experience
at the bottom of it, the bitterness which gives
sharpness to his general condemnation and poisons



390



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the arrows with which he shoots ; he unburdens
himself first as an individual, and thinks of getting
a remedy which, while benefiting society directly,
will also benefit himself indirectly by means of
society.

6i8.

Philosophically Minded. — We usually en-
deavour to acquire one attitude of mind, one set
of opinions for all situations and events of life —
it is mostly called being philosophically minded.
But for the acquisition of knowledge it may be of
greater importance not to make ourselves thus
uniform, but to hearken to the low voice of the
different situations in life ; these bring their own
opinions with them. We thus take an intelligent
interest in the life and nature of many persons by
not treating ourselves as rigid, persistent single
individuals.

619.

In the Fire of Contempt. — It is a fresh
step towards independence when one first dares
to give utterance to opinions which it is considered
as disgraceful for a person to entertain ; even
friends and acquaintances are then accustomed to
grow anxious. The gifted nature must also pass
through this fire ; it afterwards belongs far more
to itself.

620.

Self-sacrifice. — In the event of choice, a
great sacrifice is preferred to a small one, because
we compensate ourselves for the great sacrifice by



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 39 1

self-admiration, which is not possible in the case
of a small one.

621.

Love as an Artifice, — Whoever really wishes
to become acquainted with something new (whether
it be a person, an event, or a book), does well to
take up the matter with all possible love, and to
avert his eye quickly from all that seems hostile,
objectionable, and false therein, — in fact to forget
such things ; so that, for instance, he gives the
author of a book the best start possible, and
straightway, just as in a race, longs with beating
heart that he may reach the goal. In this manner
one penetrates to the heart of the new thing, to its
moving point, and this is called becoming ac-
quainted with it. This stage having been arrived
at, the understanding afterwards makes its restric-
tions ; the over-estimation and the temporary
suspension of the critical pendulum were only
artifices to lure forth the soul of the matter.



622.

Thinking Too Well and Too III of the
World. — Whether we think too well or too ill of
things, we always have the advantage of deriving
therefrom a greater pleasure, for with a too good
preconception we usually put more sweetness into
things (experiences) than they actually contain. A
too bad preconception causes a pleasant disap-
pointment, the pleasantness that lay in the things
themselves is increased by the pleasantness of the



392



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



surprise. A gloomy temperament, however, will
have the reverse experience in both cases.

623.

Profound People, — Those whose strength lies
in the deepening of impressions — they are usually
called profound people — are relatively self-pos-
sessed and decided in all sudden emergencies, for
in the first moment the impression is still shallow,
it only then becomes deep. Long foreseen, long
expected events or persons, however, excite such
natures most, and make them almost incapable of
eventually having presence of mind on the arrival
thereof.

624.

Intercourse with the Higher Self, —
Every one has his good day, when he finds his
higher self; and true humanity demands that a
person shall be estimated according to this state
and not according to his work-days of constraint
and bondage. A painter, for instance, should be
appraised and honoured according to the most
exalted vision he could see and represent. But
men themselves commune very differently with
this their higher self, and are frequently their own
playactors, in so far as they repeatedly imitate
what they are in those moments. Some stand in
awe and humility before their ideal, and would
fain deny it ; they are afraid of their higher self
because, when it speaks, it speaks pretentiously.
Besides, it has a ghost- like freedom of coming and
staying away just as it pleases ; on that account it



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 393

is often called a gift of the gods, while in fact
everything else is a gift of the gods (of chance) ;
this, however, is the man himself.



625.

Lonely People. — Some people are so much
accustomed to being alone in self-communion that
they do not at all compare themselves with others,
but spin out their soliloquising life in a quiet,
happy mood, conversing pleasantly, and even
hilariously, with themselves. If, however, they
are brought to the point of comparing them-
selves with others, they are inclined to a brooding
under-estimation of their own worth, so that they
have first to be compelled by others to form once
more a good and just opinion of themselves, and
even from this acquired opinion they will always
want to subtract and abate something. We must
not, therefore, grudge certain persons their loneli-
ness or foolishly commiserate them on that account,
as is so often done.

626.

Without Melody. — There are persons to
whom a constant repose in themselves and the
harmonious ordering of all their capacities is so
natural that every definite activity is repugnant to
them. They resemble music which consists of
nothing but prolonged, harmonious accords, without
even the tendency to an organised and animated
melody showing itself. All external movement
serves only to restore to the boat its equilibrium



394



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



on the sea of harmonious euphony. Modern men
usually become excessively impatient when they
meet such natures, who will never be anything in the
world, only it is not allowable to say of them that
they are nothing. But in certain moods the sight
of them raises the unusual question : " Why should
there be melody at all? Why should it not
suffice us when life mirrors itself peacefully in a
deep lake?" The Middle Ages were richer in
such natures than our times. How seldom one
now meets with any one who can live on so peace-
fully and happily with himself even in the midst
of the crowd, saying to himself, like Goethe, " The
best thing of all is the deep calm in which I live
and grow in opposition to the world, and gain
what it cannot take away from me with fire and
sword."

627.

To Live and Experience. — If we observe
how some people can deal with their experiences
— their unimportant, everyday experiences — so
that these become soil which yields fruit thrice
a year ; whilst others — and how many ! — are
driven through the surf of the most exciting
adventures, the most diversified movements of
times and peoples, and yet always remain light,
always remain on the surface, like cork ; we are
finally tempted to divide mankind into a minority
(minimality) of those who know how to make
much out of little, and a majority of those who
know how to make little out of much ; indeed, we
even meet with the counter- sorcerers who, instead



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 395

of making the world out of nothing, make a
nothing out of the world.

628.

Seriousness in Play. — -In Genoa one evening,
in the twilight, I heard from a tower a long
chiming of bells ; it was never like to end, and
sounded as if insatiable above the noise of the
streets, out into the evening sky and sea-air, so
thrilling, and at the same time so childish and so
sad. I then remembered the words of Plato, and
suddenly felt the force of them in my heart :
" Human matters, one and all, are not worthy of
great seriousness ; nevertheless ..."

629.

Conviction and Justice. — The requirement
that a person must afterwards, when cool and
sober, stand by what he says, promises, and resolves
during passion, is one of the heaviest burdens that
weigh upon mankind. To have to acknowledge
for all future time the consequences of anger, of
fiery revenge, of enthusiastic devotion, may lead to
a bitterness against these feelings proportionate
to the idolatry with which they are idolised,
especially by artists. These cultivate to its
full extent the esteem of the passions, and have
always done so ; to be sure, they also glorify the
terrible satisfaction of the passions which a person
affords himself, the outbreaks of vengeance, with
death, mutilation, or voluntary banishment in their
train, and the resignation of the broken heart.



39<5



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



In any case they keep alive curiosity about the
passions ; it is as if they said : " Without passions
you have no experience whatever." Because we
have sworn fidelity (perhaps even to a purely
fictitious being, such as a god), because we have
surrendered our heart to a prince, a party, a
woman, a priestly order, an artist, or a thinker, in
a state of infatuated delusion that threw a charm
over us and made those beings appear worthy of
all veneration, and every sacrifice — are we, there-
fore, firmly and inevitably bound ? Or did we
not, after all, deceive ourselves then ? Was there
not a hypothetical promise, under the tacit pre-
supposition that those beings to whom we conse-
crated ourselves were really the beings they
seemed to be in our imagination ? Are we under
obligation to be faithful to our errors, even with
the knowledge that by this fidelity we shall cause
injury to our higher selves ? No, there is no law,
no obligation of that sort ; we must become traitors,
we must act unfaithfully and abandon our ideals
again and again. We cannot advance from one
period of life into another without causing these
pains of treachery and also suffering from them.
Might it be necessary to guard against the ebulli-
tions of our feelings in order to escape these pains ?
Would not the world then become too arid, too
ghost-like for us? Rather will we ask ourselves
whether these pains are necessary on a change of
convictions, or whether they do not depend on
a mistaken opinion and estimate. Why do we
admire a person who remains true to his convic-
tions and despise him who changes them ? I fear



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 397

the answer must be, " because every one takes for
granted that such a change is caused only by
motives of more general utility or of personal
trouble." That is to say, we believe at bottom
that nobody alters his opinions as long as they are
advantageous to him, or at least as long as they
do not cause him any harm. If it is so, however,
it furnishes a bad proof of the intellectual signifi-
cance of all convictions. Let us once examine
how convictions arise, and let us see whether their
importance is not greatly over-estimated ; it will
thereby be seen that the change of convictions also
is in all circumstances judged according to a false
standard, that we have hitherto been accustomed
to suffer too much from this change.

630.

Conviction is belief in the possession of abso-
lute truth on any matter of knowledge. This belief
takes it for granted, therefore, that there are
absolute truths ; also, that perfect methods have
been found for attaining to them ; and finally, that
every one who has convictions makes use of these
perfect methods. All three notions show at once
that the man of convictions is not the man of
scientific thought ; he seems to us still in the
age of theoretical innocence, and is practically a
child, however grown-up he may be. Whole
centuries, however, have been lived under the
influence of those childlike presuppositions, and
out of them have flowed the mightiest sources
of human strength. The countless numbers who



398 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

sacrificed themselves for their convictions believed
they were doing it for the sake of absolute truth.
They were all wrong, however ; probably no one
has ever sacrificed himself for Truth ; at least, the
dogmatic expression of the faith of any such person
has been unscientific or only partly scientific. But
really, people wanted to carry their point because
they believed that they must be in the right. To
allow their belief to be wrested from them prob-
ably meant calling in question their eternal salva-
tion. In an affair of such extreme importance
the " will " was too audibly the prompter of the
intellect. The presupposition of every believer
of every shade of belief has been that he could not
be confuted ; if the counter-arguments happened
to be very strong, it always remained for him to
decry intellect generally, and, perhaps, even to set
up the " credo quia absurdum est " as the standard
of extreme fanaticism. It is not the struggle of
opinions that has made history so turbulent ; but
the struggle of belief in opinions, — that is to say, of
convictions. If all those who thought so highly
of their convictions, who made sacrifices of all
kinds for them, and spared neither honour, body,
nor life in their service, had only devoted half of
their energy to examining their right to adhere to
this or that conviction and by what road they
arrived at it, how peaceable would the history of
mankind now appear ! How much more know-
ledge would there be! All the cruel scenes in
connection with the persecution of heretics of all
kinds would have been avoided, for two reasons :
firstly, because the inquisitors would above all have



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 399

inquired of themselves, and would have recognised
the presumption of defending absolute truth ; and
secondly, because the heretics themselves would,
after examination, have taken no more interest in
such badly established doctrines as those of all
religious sectarians and " orthodox " believers.



631.

From the ages in which it was customary to
believe in the possession of absolute truth, people
have inherited a profound dislike of all sceptical
and relative attitudes with regard to questions of
knowledge ; they mostly prefer to acquiesce, for
good or evil, in the convictions of those in
authority (fathers, friends, teachers, princes), and
they have a kind of remorse of conscience when
they do not do so. This tendency is quite com-
prehensible, and its results furnish no ground for
condemnation of the course of the development
of human reason. The scientific spirit in man,
however, has gradually to bring to maturity the
virtue of cautious forbearance, the wise modera-
tion, which is better known in practical than in
theoretical life, and which, for instance, Goethe
has represented in " Antonio," as an object of
provocation for all Tassos, — that is to say, for
unscientific and at the same time inactive natures.
The man of convictions has in himself the right
not to comprehend the man of cautious thought,
the theoretical Antonio ; the scientific man, on the
other hand, has no right to blame the former on
that account, he takes no notice thereof, and



400



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



knows, moreover, that in certain cases the former
will yet cling to him, as Tasso finally clung to
Antonio.

632.

He who has not passed through different
phases of conviction, but sticks to the faith in
whose net he was first caught, is, under all circum-
stances, just on account of this unchangeableness,
a representative of atavistic culture ; in accordance
with this lack of culture (which always pre-
supposes plasticity for culture), he is severe, un-
intelligent, unteachable, without liberality, an ever
suspicious person, an unscrupulous person who
has recourse to all expedients for enforcing his
opinions because he cannot conceive that there
must be other opinions ; he is, in such respects,
perhaps a source of strength, and even wholesome
in cultures that have become too emancipated and
languid, but only because he strongly incites to
opposition : for thereby the delicate organisation
of the new culture, which is forced to struggle
with him, becomes strong itself.



633.

In essential respects we are still the same men
as those of the time of the Reformation ; how
could it be otherwise? But the fact that we
no longer allow ourselves certain means for pro-
moting the triumph of our opinions distinguishes
us from that age, and proves that we belong to
a higher culture. He who still combats and
overthrows opinions with calumnies and outbursts



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 4OI

of rage, after the manner of the Reformation men,
obviously betrays the fact that he would have
burnt his adversaries had he lived in other times,
and that he would have resorted to all the
methods of the Inquisition if he had been an
opponent of the Reformation. The Inquisition
was rational at that time ; for it represented
nothing else than the universal application of
martial law, which had to be proclaimed through-
out the entire domain of the Church, and which,
like all martial law, gave a right to the extremest
methods, under the presupposition, of course,
(which we now no longer share with those people),
that the Church possessed truth and had to preserve
it at all costs, and at any sacrifice, for the salvation
of mankind. Now, however, one does not so
readily concede to any one that he possesses the
truth ; strict methods of investigation have diffused
enough of distrust and precaution, so that every
one who violently advocates opinions in word and
deed is looked upon as an enemy of our modern
culture, or, at least, as an atavist. As a matter
of fact the pathos that man possesses truth is
now of very little consequence in comparison with
the certainly milder and less noisy pathos of the
search for truth, which is never weary of learning
afresh and examining anew.

634.

Moreover, the methodical search for truth is
itself the outcome of those ages in which con-
victions were at war with each other. If the
VOL. I. 2C



402 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

individual had not cared about his " truth," that
is to say, about carrying his point, there would
have been no method of investigation ; thus,
however, by the eternal struggle of the claims of
different individuals to absolute truth, people went
on step by step to find irrefragable principles
according to which the rights of the claims could
be tested and the dispute settled. At first people
decided according to authorities ; later on they
criticised one another's ways and means of finding
the presumed truth ; in the interval there was a
period when people deduced the consequences of
the adverse theor}% and perhaps found them to be
productive of injury and unhappiness ; from which
it was then to be inferred by every one that the
conviction of the adversary involved an error.
The personal struggle of the thinker at last so
sharpened his methods that real truths could be
discovered, and the mistakes of former methods
exposed before the eyes of all.

635.

On the whole, scientific methods are at least
as important results of investigation as any other
results, for the scientific spirit is based upon a
knowledge of method, and if the methods were
lost, all the results of science could not prevent
the renewed prevalence of superstition and
absurdity. Clever people may learn as much as
they like of the results of science, but one still
notices in their conversation, and especially in
the hypotheses they make, that they lack the



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 403

scientific spirit; they have not the instinctive
distrust of the devious courses of thinking which,
in consequence of long training, has taken root
in the soul of every scientific man. It is enough
for them to find any kind of hypothesis on a
subject, they are then all on fire for it, and
imagine the matter is thereby settled. To have
an opinion is with them equivalent to immedi-
ately becoming fanatical for it, and finally taking
it to heart as a conviction. In the case of
an unexplained matter they become heated for
the first idea that comes into their head which
has any resemblance to an explanation — a course
from which the worst results constantly follow,
especially in the field of politics. On that ac-
count everybody should nowadays have become
thoroughly acquainted with at least one science,
for then surely he knows what is meant by
method, and how necessary is the extremest
carefulness. To women in particular this advice
is to be given at present; as to those who are
irretrievably the victims of all hypotheses, especi-
ally when these have the appearance of being
witty, attractive, enlivening, and invigorating.
Indeed, on close inspection one sees that by far
the greater number of educated people still desire
convictions from a thinker and nothing but con-
victions^ and that only a small minority want
certainty. The former want to be forcibly carried
away in order thereby to obtain an increase of
strength ; the latter few have the real interest
which disregards personal advantages and the
increase of strength also. The former class, who



404 . HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

greatly predominate, are always reckoned upon
when the thinker comports himself and labels
himself as a genius^ and thus views himself as a
higher being to whom authority belongs. In so
far as genius of this kind upholds the ardour of
convictions, and arouses distrust of the cautious
and modest spirit of science, it is an enemy of
truth, however much it may think itself the
wooer thereof.

636.

There is, certainly, also an entirely different
species of genius, that of justice; and I cannot
make up my mind to estimate it lower than any
kind of philosophical, political, or artistic genius.
Its peculiarity is to go, with heartfelt aversion, out
of the way of everything that blinds and confuses
people's judgment of things ; it is consequently
an adversary of convictions, for it wants to give
their own to all, whether they be living or dead,
real or imaginary — and for that purpose it must
know thoroughly ; it therefore places everything
in the best light and goes around it with careful
eyes. Finally, it will even give to its adversary
the blind or short-sighted " conviction " (as men
call it, — among women it is called " faith "), what
is due to conviction — for the sake of truth.

637.

Opinions evolve out of passions ; indolence of

intellect allows those to congeal into convictions.

He, however, who is conscious of himself as a

free, restless, lively spirit can prevent this conge-



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 405

lation by constant change ; and if he is altogether
a thinking snowball, he will not have opinions in
his head at all, but only certainties and properly
estimated probabilities. But we, who are of a
mixed nature, alternately inspired with ardour
and chilled through and through by the intellect,
want to kneel before justice, as the only goddess
we acknowledge. The^re in us generally makes
us unjust, and impure in the eyes of our goddess ;
in this condition we are not permitted to take
her hand, and the serious smile of her approval
never rests upon us. We reverence her as the
veiled Isis of our life ; with shame we offer her
our pain as penance and sacrifice when the fire
threatens to burn and consume us. It is the
intellect that saves us from being utterly burnt and
reduced to ashes ; it occasionally drags us away
from the sacrificial altar of justice or enwraps us
in a garment of asbestos. Liberated from the
fire, and impelled by the intellect, we then pass
from opinion to opinion, through the change of
parties, as noble betrayers of all things that can
in any way be betrayed — and nevertheless with-
out a feeling of guilt.

638.

The Wanderer. — He who has attained in-
tellectual emancipation to any extent cannot, for
a long time, regard himself otherwise than as a
wanderer on the face of the earth — and not even
as a traveller towards a final goal, for there is no
such thing. But he certainly wants to observe and



406 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

keep his eyes open to whatever actually happens
in the world ; therefore he cannot attach his
heart too firmly to anything individual ; he must
have in himself something wandering that takes
pleasure in change and transitoriness. To be
sure such a man will have bad nights, when he
is weary and finds the gates of the town that
should offer him rest closed ; perhaps he may
also find that, as in the East, the desert reaches
to the gates, that wild beasts howl far and near,
that a strong wind arises, and that robbers take
away his beasts of burden. Then the dreadful
night closes over him like a second desert upon
the desert, and his heart grows weary of wander-
ing. Then when the morning sun rises upon
him, glowing like a Deity of anger, when the
town is opened, he sees perhaps in the faces of
the dwellers therein still more desert, uncleanli-
ness, deceit, and insecurity than outside the gates
— and the day is almost worse than the night.
Thus it may occasionally happen to the wanderer ;
but then there come as compensation the delight-
ful mornings of other lands and days, when already
in the grey of the dawn he sees the throng of
muses dancing by, close to him, in the mist of
the mountain ; when afterwards, in the symmetry
of his ante-meridian soul, he strolls silently under
the trees, out of whose crests and leafy hiding-
places all manner of good and bright things are
flung to him, the gifts of all the free spirits who
are at home in mountains, forests, and solitudes,
and who, like himself, alternately merry and
thoughtful, are wanderers and philosophers. Born



MAN ALONE BY HIMSELF. 407

of the secrets of the early dawn, they ponder the
question how the day, between the hours of ten
and twelve, can have such a pure, transparent,
and gloriously cheerful countenance : they seek
the ante-meridian philosophy.



AN EPODE.

AMONG FRIENDS.

{Translated by T. Common.)

I.

Nice, when mute we lie a-dreaming,
Nicer still when we are laughing,
'Neath the sky heaven's chariot speeding,
On the moss the book a-reading,
Sweetly loud with friends all laughing
Joyous, with white teeth a-gleaming.

Do I well, we're mute and humble;
Do I ill — we'll laugh exceeding;
Make it worse and worse, unheeding,
Worse proceeding, more laughs needing.
Till into the grave we stumble.

Friends! Yea! so shall it obtain?
Amen I Till we meet again.



II.

No excuses need be started!
Give, ye glad ones, open hearted,



4IO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

To this foolish book before you
Ear and heart and lodging meet ;
Trust me, 'twas not meant to bore you,
Though of folly I may treat !

What I find, seek, and am needing,
Was it e'er in book for reading?
Honour now fools in my name,
Learn from out this book by reading
How "our sense" from reason came.

Thus, my friends, shall it obtain?
Amen ! Till we meet again.