HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN



PART I.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND
OPINIONS.



I.

To the Disillusioned in Philosophy. — If you
hitherto believed in the highest value of life and
now find yourselves disillusioned, must you im-
mediately get rid of life at the lowest possible
price ?

2.

OVERNICE. — One can even become overnice as
regards the clearness of concepts. How disgusted
one is then at having truck with the half-clear, the
hazy, the aspiring, the doubting ! How ridiculous
and yet not mirth-provoking is their eternal flutter-
ing and straining without ever being able to fly or
to grasp !



The Wooers of Reality. — He who realises
at last how long and how thoroughly he has been
befooled, embraces out of spite even the ugliest
reality. So that in the long run of the world's
history the best men have always been wooers of
reality, for the best have always been longest and
most thoroughly deceived.



14 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Advance of Freethinking. — The difference
between past and present freethinking cannot better
be characterised than by that aphorism for the recog-
nition and expression of which all the fearlessness of
the eighteenth century was needed, and which even
then, if measured by our modern view, sinks into an
unconscious naivete. I mean Voltaire's aphorism,
" croyez-moi, mon ami, l'erreur aussi a son merite."



A Hereditary Sin of Philosophers. — Philo-
sophers have at all times appropriated arid corrupted
the maxims of censors of men (moralists), by taking
them over without qualification and trying to prove
as necessary what the moralists only meant as a
rough indication or as a truth suited to their fellow-
countrymen or fellow-townsmen for a single decade.
Moreover, the philosophers thought that they were
thereby raising themselves above the moralists !
Thus it will be found that the celebrated teachings
of Schopenhauer as to the supremacy of the will
over the intellect, of the immutability of character,
the negativity of pleasure — all errors, in the sense
in which he understands them — rest upon principles
of popular wisdom enunciated by the moralists.
Take the very word "will," which Schopenhauer
twisted so as to become a common denotation of
several human conditions and with which he filled
a gap in the language (to his own great advantage,
in so far as he was a moralist, for he became free to



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 5

speak of the will as Pascal had spoken of it). In
the hands of its creator, Schopenhauer's " will,"
through the philosophic craze for generalisation,
already turned out to be a bane to knowledge. For
this will was made into a poetic metaphor, when it
was held that all things in nature possess will.
Finally, that it might be applied to all kinds of
disordered mysticism, the word was misused by a
fraudulent convention. So now all our fashionable
philosophers repeat it and seem to be perfectly
certain that all things have a will and are in fact
One Will. According to the description generally
given of this All-One-Will, this is much as if one
should positively try to have the stupid Devil for
one's God.



Against Visionaries. — The visionary denies
the truth to himself, the liar only to others.



Enmity to LiGHT.—If we make it clear to any
one that, strictly, he can never speak of truth, but
only of probability and of its degrees, we generally
discover, from the undisguised joy of our pupil,
how greatly men prefer the uncertainty of their in-
tellectual horizon, and how in their heart of hearts
they hate truth because of its definiteness. — Is this
due to a secret fear felt by all that the light of truth
may at some time be turned too brightly upon them-
selves ? To their wish to be of some consequence,
and accordingly their concealment from the world of






1 6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

what they are ? Or is it to be traced to their horror
of the ail-too brilliant light, to which their crepus-
cular, easily dazzled, bat-like souls are not accus-
tomed, so that hate it they must ?

8.

Christian Scepticism. — Pilate, with his ques-
tion, " What is Truth ? " is now gleefully brought on
the scene as an advocate of Christ, in order to cast
suspicion on all that is known or knowable as being
mere appearance, and to erect the Cross on the ap-
palling background of the Impossibility of Know-
ledge.

9-

" Natural Law," a Phrase of Superstition.
— When you talk so delightedly of Nature acting
according to law, you must either assume that all
things in Nature follow their law from a voluntary
obedience imposed by themselves — in which case
you admire the morality of Nature : or you are en-
chanted with the idea of a creative mechanician,
who has made a most cunning watch with human
beings as accessory ornaments. — Necessity, through
the expression, " conformity to law," then becomes
more human and a coign of refuge in the last in-
stance for mythological reveries.

10.

Fallen Forfeit to History. — All misty
philosophers and obscurers of the world, in other
words all metaphysicians of coarse or refined texture



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. I?

are seized with eyeache, earache, and toothache
when they begin to suspect that there is truth in
the saying : " All philosophy has from now fallen
forfeit to history." In view of their aches and pains
we may pardon them for throwing stones and filth
at him who talks like this, but this teaching may
itself thereby become dirty and disreputable for a
time and lose in effect.



II.

The Pessimist of the Intellect. — He whose
intellect is really free will think freely about the in-
tellect itself, and will not shut his eyes to certain
terrible aspects of its source and tendency. For
this reason others will perhaps designate him the
bitterest opponent of free thought and give him that
dreadful, abusive name of "pessimist of the in-
tellect " : accustomed as they are to typify a man
not by his strong point, his pre-eminent virtue, but
by the quality that is most foreign to his nature.



12.

The Metaphysicians' Knapsack. — To all
who talk so boastfully of the scientific basis of
their metaphysics it is best to make no reply.
It is enough to tug at the bundle that they
rather shyly keep hidden behind their backs.
If one succeeds in lifting it, the results of that
" scientific basis " come to light, to their great
confusion : a dear little " God," a genteel immor-
tality, perhaps a little spiritualism, and in any case

VOL. II. B



1 8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

a complicated mass of poor-sinners'-misery and
pharisee-arrogance.

13-

Occasional Harmfulness of Knowledge. —
The utility involved in the unchecked investigation of
knowledge is so constantly proved in a hundred
different ways that one must remember to include in
the bargain the subtler and rarer damage which
individuals must suffer on that account. Thechemist
cannot avoid occasionally being poisoned or burnt
at his experiments. What applies to the chemist,
is true of the whole of our culture. This, it may be
added, clearly shows that knowledge should provide
itself with healing balsam against burns and should
always have antidotes ready against poisons.

14.

The Craving of the Philistine. — The Philis-
tine thinks that his most urgent need is a purple
patch or turban of metaphysics, nor will he let it
slip. Yet he would look less ridiculous without
this adornment.

15.

ENTHUSIASTS. — With all that enthusiasts say in
favour of their gospel or their master they are de-
fending themselves, however much they comport
themselves as the judges and not the accused :
because they are involuntarily reminded almost at
every moment that they are exceptions and have
to assert their legitimacy.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 9
16.

The Good Seduces to Life. — All good things,
even all good books that are written against life,
are strong means of attraction to life.

17.

The Happiness of the Historian. — "When
we hear the hair-splitting metaphysicians and pro-
phets of the after-world speak, we others feel indeed
that we are the ' poor in spirit,' but that ours is
the heavenly kingdom of change, with spring and
autumn, summer and winter, and theirs the after-
world, with its grey, everlasting frosts and shadows."
Thus soliloquised a man as he walked in the
morning sunshine, a man who in his pursuit of
history has constantly changed not only his mind
but his heart. In contrast to the metaphysicians,
he is happy to harbour in himself not an " immortal
soul " but many mortal souls.

18.

Three Varieties of Thinkers. — There are
streaming, flowing, trickling mineral springs, and
three corresponding varieties of thinkers. The lay-
man values them by the volume of the water,
the expert by the contents of the water — in other
words, by the elements in them that are not water.

19.

The Picture of Life.— The task of painting
the picture of life, often as it has been attempted



20 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

by poets and philosophers, is nevertheless irrational.
Even in the hands of the greatest artist-thinkers,
pictures and miniatures of one life only — their own
— have come into being, and indeed no other result
is possible. While in the process of developing, a
thing that develops, cannot mirror itself as fixed
and permanent, as a definite object.



20.

Truth will have no Gods before it. — The
belief in truth begins with the doubt of all truths in
which one has previously believed.



21.

Where Silence is Required. — If we speak of
freethinking as of a highly dangerous journey over
glaciers and frozen seas, we find that those who do
not care to travel on this track are offended, as if
they had been reproached with cowardice and
weak knees. The difficult, which we find to be be-
yond our powers, must not even be mentioned in
our presence.

22.

Historia in Nuce. — The most serious parody
I ever heard was this : " In the beginning was the
nonsense, and the nonsense was with God, and the
nonsense was God." *

* Cf. John i. i.— Tr.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 21

23.

Incurable. — The idealist is incorrigible: if he
be thrown out of his Heaven, he makes himself a
suitable ideal out of Hell. Disillusion him, and lo !
he will embrace disillusionment with no less ardour
than he recently embraced hope. In so far as his
impulse belongs to the great incurable impulses of
human nature, he can bring about tragic destinies
and later become a subject for tragedy himself, for
such tragedies as deal with the incurable, implac-
able, inevitable in the lot and character of man.

24.

Applause Itself as the Continuation of
the Play. — Sparkling eyes and an amiable smile
are the tributes of applause paid to all the great
comedy of world and existence — but this applause
is a comedy within a comedy, meant to tempt the
other spectators to a plaudite amici.

25-

Courage for Tedium. — He who has not the
courage to allow himself and his work to be con-
sidered tedious, is certainly no intellect of the first
rank, whether in the arts or in the sciences. — A
scoffer, who happened for once in a way to be a
thinker, might add, with a glance at the world and
at history : " God did not possess this courage, for
he wanted to make and he made all things so in-
teresting."



22 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

26.

From the Most Intimate Experience of
the Thinker. — Nothing is harder for a man than
to conceive of an object impersonally, I mean to
see in it an object and not a person. One may
even ask whether it is possible for him to dis-
pense for a single moment with the machinery of
his instinct to create and construct a personality.
After all, he associates with his thoughts, however
abstract they may be, as with individuals, against
whom he must fight or to whom he must attach
himself, whom he must protect, support and nourish.
Let us watch or listen to ourselves at the moment
when we hear or discover a new idea. Perhaps it
displeases us because it is so defiant and so auto-
cratic, and we unconsciously ask ourselves whether
we cannot place a contradiction of it by its side as
an enemy, or fasten on to it a "perhaps" or a
"sometimes": the mere little word "probably"
gives us a feeling of satisfaction, for it shatters the
oppressive tyranny of the unconditional. If, on the
other hand, the new idea enters in gentle shape,
sweetly patient and humble, and falling at once
into the arms of contradiction, we put our autocracy
to the test in another way. Can we not come to
the aid of this weak creature, stroke it and feed it,
give it strength and fulness, and truth and even
unconditionality ? Is it possible for us to show
ourselves parental or chivalrous or compassionate
towards our idea? — Then again, we see here a
judgment and there a judgment, sundered from
each other, never looking at or making any move-



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 23

ment towards each other. So we are tickled by
the thought, whether it be not here feasible to make
a match, to draw a conclusion, with the anticipation
that if a consequence follows this conclusion it is
not only the two judgments united in wedlock but
the matchmakers that will gain honour. If, how-
ever, we cannot acquire a hold upon that thought
either on the path of defiance and ill-will or on that
of good-will (if we hold it to be true) — then we
submit to it and do homage to it as a leader and a
prince, give it a chair of honour, and speak not of
it without a flourish of trumpets : for we are bright
in its brightness. Woe to him who tries to dim
this brightness ! Perhaps we ourselves one day
grow suspicious of our idea. Then we, the inde-
fatigable " king-makers * of the history of the intel-
lect, cast it down from its throne and immediately
exalt its adversary. Surely if this be considered
and thought out a little further, no one will speak of
an " absolute impulse to knowledge " !

Why, then, does man prefer the true to the un-
true, in this secret combat with thought-person-
alities, in this generally clandestine match-making of
thoughts, constitution-founding of thoughts, child-
rearing of thoughts, nursing and almsgiving of
thoughts ? For the same reason that he practises
honesty in intercourse with real persons : now from
habit, heredity, and training, originally because the
true, like the fair and the just, is more expedient and
more reputable than the untrue. For in the realm of
thought it is difficult to assume a power and glory
that are built on error or on falsehood. The feeling
that such an edifice might at some time collapse is



24 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

humiliating to the self-esteem of the architect — he is
ashamed of the fragility of the material, and, as he
considers himself more important than the rest of
the world, he would fain construct nothing that is
less durable than the rest of the world. In his long-
ing for truth he embraces the belief in a personal
immortality, the most arrogant and defiant idea
that exists, closely allied as it is to the underly-
ing thought, pereat tnundus, dum ego salvus sim !
His work has become his "ego," he transforms
himself into the Imperishable with its universal
challenge. It is his immeasurable pride that will
only employ the best and hardest stones for the
work — truths,' or what he holds for such. Arro-
gance has always been justly called the "vice of
the sage " ; yet without this vice, fruitful in impul-
ses, Truth and her status on earth would be in
a parlous plight. In our propensity to fear our
thoughts, concepts and words, and yet to honour
ourselves in them, unconsciously to ascribe to
them the power of rewarding, despising, praising,
and blaming us, and so to associate with them as
with free intellectual personalities, as with inde-
pendent powers, as with our equals — herein lie the
roots of the remarkable phenomenon which I have
called "intellectual conscience." Thus something
of the highest moral species has bloomed from a
black root.

27.

The Obscurantists.— The essential feature of
the black art of obscurantism is not its intention
of clouding the brain, but its attempt to darken



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 25

the picture of the world and cloud our idea of
existence. It often employs the method of thwart-
ing all illumination of the intellect, but at times
it uses the very opposite means, seeking by the
highest refinement of the intellect to induce a
satiety of the intellect's fruits. Hair-splitting meta-
physicians, who pave the way for scepticism and
by their excessive acumen provoke a distrust of
acumen, are excellent instruments of the more
subtle form of obscurantism. — Is it possible that
even Kant may be applied to this purpose ? Did
he even intend something of the sort, for a time at
least, to judge from his own notorious exposition :
" to clear the way for belief by setting limitations
to knowledge " ? — Certainly he did not succeed, nor
did his followers, on the wolf and fox tracks of this
highly refined and dangerous form of obscurant-
ism — the most dangerous of all, for the black art
here appears in the garb of light.



28.

By what Kind of Philosophy Art is
Corrupted. — When the mists of a metaphysical-
mystical philosophy succeed in making all aesthetic
phenomena opaque, it follows that these phenomena
cannot be comparatively valued, inasmuch as each
becomes individually inexplicable. But when once
they cannot be compared for the sake of valuation,
there arises an entire absence-of-criticism, a blind
indulgence. From this source springs a continual
diminution of the enjoyment of art (which is only
distinguished from the crude satisfaction of a need



26 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

by the highest refinement of taste and appreciation).
The more taste diminishes, the more does the desire
for art change and revert to a vulgar hunger, which
the artist henceforth seeks to appease by ever coarser
fare.

29.

On Gethsemane.— The most painful thing a
thinker can say to artists is : " Could ye not watch
with me one hour?"

30.

At the Loom. — There are many (artists and
women, for instance) who work against the few
that take a pleasure in untying the knot of things
and unravelling their woof. The former always
want to weave the woof together again and en-
tangle it and so turn the conceived into the un-
conceivedand if possible inconceivable. Whatever
the result may be, the woof and knot always look
rather untidy, because too many hands are working
and tugging at them.

3i.

In the Desert of Science.— As the man of
science proceeds on his modest and toilsome
wanderings, which must often enough be journeys
in the desert, he is confronted with those brilliant
mirages known as "philosophic systems." With
magic powers of deception they show him that
the solution of all riddles and the most refreshing
draught of true water of life are close at hand. His
weary heart rejoices, and he well-nigh touches with



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 2J

his lips the goal of all scientific endurance and
hardship, so that almost unconsciously he presses
forward. Other natures stand still, as if spellbound
by the beautiful illusion : the desert swallows them
up, they become lost to science. Other natures,
again, that have often experienced these subjective
consolations, become very disheartened and curse
the salty taste which these mirages leave behind in
the mouth and from which springs a raging thirst
— without one's having come one step nearer to any
sort of a spring.

32.

The So-called " Real Reality."— When the
poet depicts the various callings — such as those of
the warrior, the silk-weaver, the sailor — he feigns to
know all these things thoroughly, to be an expert.
Even in the exposition of human actions and des-
tinies he behaves as if he had been present at the
spinning of the whole web of existence. In so far
he is an impostor. He practises his frauds on pure
ignoramuses, and that is why he succeeds. They
praise him for his deep, genuine knowledge, and
lead him finally into the delusion that he really
knows as much as the individual experts and
creators, yes, even as the great world-spinners
themselves. In the end, the impostor becomes
honest, and actually believes in his own sincerity.
Emotional people say to his very face that he has
the "higher" truth and sincerity — for they are
weary of reality for the time being, and accept the
poetic dream as a pleasant relaxation and a night's
rest for head and heart. The visions of the dream



28 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

now appear to them of more value, because, as has
been said, they find them more beneficial, and man-
kind has always held that what is apparently of
more value is more true, more real. All that is
generally called reality, the poets, conscious of this
power, proceed with intention to disparage and to
distort into the uncertain, the illusory, the spurious,
the impure, the sinful, sorrowful, and deceitful. They
make use of all doubts about the limits of knowledge,
of all sceptical excesses, in order to spread over every-
thing the rumpled veil of uncertainty. For they
desire that when this darkening process is complete
their wizardry and soul-magic may be accepted
without hesitation as the path to " true truth " and
" real reality."

33-

The Wish to be Just and the Wish to be
A Judge. — Schopenhauer, whose profound under-
standing of what is human and all-too-human and
original sense for facts was not a little impaired by
the bright leopard-skin of his metaphysic (the skin
must first be pulled off him if one wants to find the
real moralist genius beneath) — Schopenhauermakes
this admirable distinction, wherein he comes far
nearer the mark than he would himself dare to ad-
mit : " Insight into the stern necessity of human
actions is the boundary line that divides philoso-
phic from other brains." He worked against that
wonderful insight of which he was sometimes
capable by the prejudice that he had in common
with the moral man (not the moralist), a prejudice
that he expresses quite guilelessly and devoutly as



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 29

follows : "The ultimate and true explanation of the
inner being of the entirety of things must of neces-
sity be closely connected with that about the ethical
significance of human actions." This connection is
not " necessary " at all : such a connection must
rather be rejected by that principle of the stern
necessity of human actions, that is, the unconditioned
non- freedom and non -responsibility of the will.
Philosophic brains will accordingly be distinguished
from others by their disbelief in the metaphysical
significance of morality. This must create between
the two kinds of brain a gulf of a depth and un-
bridgeableness of which the much-deplored gulf
between "cultured " and " uncultured " scarcely gives
a conception. It is true that many back doors, which
the " philosophic brains," like Schopenhauer's own,
have left for themselves, must be recognised as
useless. None leads into the open, into the fresh
air of the free will, but every door through which
people had slipped hitherto showed behind it once
more the gleaming brass wall of fate. For we are
in a prison, and can only dream of freedom, not
make ourselves free. That the recognition of this
fact cannot be resisted much longer is shown by
the despairing and incredible postures and grimaces
of those who still press against it and continue their
wrestling-bout with it. Their attitude at present
is something like this : " So no one is responsible
for his actions? And all is full of guilt and the
consciousness of guilt ? But some one must be the
sinner. If it is no longer possible or permissible
to accuse and sentence the individual, the one poor
wave in the inevitable rough-and-tumble of the



30 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






waves of development — well, then, let this stormy
sea, this development itself, be the sinner. Here is
free will : this totality can be accused and sentenced,
can atone and expiate. So let God be the sinner and
man his redeemer. Let the world's history be guilt,
expiation, and self-murder. Let the evil-doer be his
own judge, the judge his own hangman." This
Christianity strained to its limits — for what else is
it? — is the last thrust in the fencing-match between
the teaching of unconditioned morality and the •
teaching of unconditioned non-freedom. It would
be quite horrible if it were anything more than a
logical pose, a hideous grimace of the underlying
thought, perhaps the death-convulsion of the heart
that seeks a remedy in its despair, the heart to which
delirium whispers: "Behold, thou art the lamb
which taketh away the sin of God." This error lies
not only in the feeling," I am responsible," but just as
much in the contradiction, " I am not responsible,
but some one must be." That is simply not true.
Hence the philosopher must say, like Christ, " Judge *
not," and the final distinction between the philo-
sophic brains and the others would be that the
former wish to be just and the latter wish to be
judges.



34-

Sacrifice. — You hold that sacrifice is the hall-
mark of moral action ? — Just consider whether in
every action that is done with deliberation, in the
best as in the worst, there be not a sacrifice.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 3 1
35-

Against the "Triers of the Reins" of
Morality. — One must know the best and the
worst that a man is capable of in theory and in
practice before one can judge how strong his moral
nature is and can be. But this is an experiment
that one can never carry out.

36.

Serpent's Tooth. — Whether we have a serpent's
tooth or not we cannot know before some one has
set his heel upon our necks. A wife or a mother
could say : until some one has put his heel upon the
neck of our darling, our child. — Our character is
determined more by the absence of certain ex-
periences than by the experiences we have under-
gone.

37-

Deception in Love. — We forget and purposely
banish from our minds a good deal of our past.
In other words, we wish our picture, that beams at
us from the past, to belie us, to flatter our vanity —
we are constantly engaged in this self-deception.
And you who talk and boast so much of " self-
oblivion in love," of the " absorption of the ego in
the other person " — you hold that this is something
different ? So you break the mirror, throw your-
selves into another personality that you admire,
and enjoy the new portrait of your ego, though
calling it by the other person's name — and this



32 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






whole proceeding is not to be thought self-deception,
self-seeking, you marvellous beings ? — It seems to
me that those who hide something of themselves
from themselves, or hide their whole selves from
themselves, are alike committing a theft from the
treasury of knowledge. It is clear, then, against
what transgression the maxim "Know thyself" is
a warning.

38.

To the Denier of his Vanity.— He who
denies his own vanity usually possesses it in so
brutal a form that he instinctively shuts his eyes
to avoid the necessity of despising himself.



39.

Why the Stupid so often Become Mal-
ignant. — To those arguments of our adversary
against which our head feels too weak our heart
replies by throwing suspicion on the motives of his
arguments.

40.

The Art of Moral Exceptions. — An art that
points out and glorifies the exceptional cases of
morality — where the good becomes bad and the
unjust just — should rarely be given a hearing : just
as now and again we buy something from gipsies,
with the fear that they are diverting to their own
pockets much more than their mere profit from the
purchase.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 33
41.

Enjoyment and Non-enjoyment of Poisons.
— The only decisive argument that has always
deterred men from drinking a poison is not that it
is deadly, but that it has an unpleasant taste.

42.

The World without Consciousness of Sin.
— If men only committed such deeds as do not
give rise to a bad conscience, the human world
would still look bad and rascally enough, but not
so sickly and pitiable as at present. — Enough
wicked men without conscience have existed at all
times, and many good honest folk lack the feeling
of pleasure in a good conscience.

43-

The Conscientious. — It is more convenient to
follow one's conscience than one's intelligence, for
at every failure conscience finds an excuse and an
encouragement in itself. That is why there are so
many conscientious and so few intelligent people.

44.

Opposite Means of Avoiding Bitterness. —
One temperament finds it useful to be able to give
vent to its disgust in words, being made sweeter by
speech. Another reaches its full bitterness only by
speaking out : it is more advisable for it to have to
gulp down something — the restraint that men of this

VOL. II. C



34 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

stamp place upon themselves in the presence of
enemies and superiors improves their character and
prevents it from becoming too acrid and sour.

45-
Not to be Too Dejected.— To get bed-sores
is unpleasant, but no proof against the merits of the
cure that prescribes that you should take to your
bed. Men who have long lived outside themselves,
and have at last devoted themselves to the inward
philosophic life, know that one can also get sores of
character and intellect. This, again, is on the whole
no argument against the chosen way of life, but
necessitates a few small exceptions and apparent
relapses.

46.

The Human "Thing in Itself." — The most
vulnerable and yet most unconquerable of things
is human vanity : nay, through being wounded its
strength increases and can grow to giant propor-
tions.

47-

The Farce of Many Industrious Persons.
— By an excess of effort they win leisure for them-
selves, and then they can do nothing with it but
count the hours until the tale is ended.

48.

The Possession of Joy Abounding. — He that
has joy abounding must be a good man, but perhaps



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 35

he is not the cleverest of men, although he has
reached the very goal towards which the cleverest
man is striving with all his cleverness.



49-

In the Mirror of Nature.— Is not a man
fairly well described, when we are told that he likes
to walk between tall fields of golden corn : that he
prefers the forest and flower colours of sere and
chilly autumn to all others, because they point to
something more beautiful than Nature has ever
attained : that he feels as much at home under big
broad -leaved walnut trees as among his nearest
kinsfolk : that in the mountains his greatest joy is to
come across those tiny distant lakes from which the
very eyes of solitude seem to peer at him : that he
loves that grey calm of the misty twilight that steals
along the windows on autumn and early winter
evenings and shuts out all soulless sounds as with
velvet curtains : that in unhewn stones he recognises
the last remaining traces of the primeval age, eager
for speech, and honours them from childhood up-
wards : that, lastly, the sea with its shifting serpent
skin and wild-beast beauty is, and remains to him,
unfamiliar? — Yes, something of the man is described
herewith, but the mirror of Nature does not say that
the same man, with (and not even " in spite of") all
his idyllic sensibilities, might be disagreeable, stingy,
and conceited. Horace, who was a good judge of
such matters, in his famous beatus Me qui procul
negotiis puts the tenderest feeling for country life
into the mouth of a Roman money-lender.



36 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

50.

Power without Victory. — The strongest cogn i-
tion (that of the complete non-freedom of the human
will) is yet the poorest in results, for it has always
had the mightiest of opponents — human vanity.

Pleasure and Error. — A beneficial influence
on friends is exerted by one man unconsciously,
through his nature ; by another consciously, through
isolated actions. Although the former nature is
held to be the higher, the latter alone is allied to
good conscience and pleasure — the pleasure in justi-
fication by good works, which rests upon a belief in
the volitional character of our good and evil doing
— that is to say, upon a mistake.

52.

The Folly of Committing Injustice.— The
injustice we have inflicted ourselves is far harder to
bear than the injustice inflicted upon us by others (not
always from moral grounds, be it observed). After all,
the doer is always the sufferer — that is, if he be capable
of feeling the sting of conscience or of perceiving that
by his action he has armed society against himself
and cut himself off. For this reason we should be-
ware still more of doing than of suffering injustice,
for the sake of our own inward happiness — so as
not to lose our feeling of well-being — quite apart
from any consideration of the precepts of religion
and morality. For in suffering injustice we have



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. S7

the consolation of a good conscience, of hope and of
revenge, together with the sympathy and applause of
the just, nay of the whole of society, which is afraid
of the evil-doer. Not a few are skilled in the impure
self-deception that enables them to transform every
injustice of their own into an injustice inflicted upon
them from without, and to reserve for their own acts
the exceptional right to the plea of self-defence.
Their object, of course, is to make their own burden
lighter.

53-
Envy with or without a Mouthpiece.—
Ordinary envy is wont to cackle when the envied
hen has laid an Ggg } thereby relieving itself and be-
coming milder. But there is a yet deeper envy that
in such a case becomes dead silent, desiring that
every mouth should be sealed and always more and
more angry because this desire is not gratified.
Silent envy grows in silence.

54.
Anger as a Spy. — Anger exhausts the soul and
brings its very dregs to light. Hence, if we know
no other means of gaining certainty, we must under-
stand how to arouse anger in our dependents and
adversaries, in order to learn what is really done and
thought to our detriment.

55.
Defence Morally more Difficult than
Attack. — The true heroic deed and masterpiece of



38 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

the good man does not lie in attacking opinions and
continuing to love their propounders, but in the far
harder task of defending his own position without
causing or intending to cause bitter heartburns to
his opponent. The sword of attack is honest and
broad, the sword of defence usually runs out to a
needle point.

56.

Honest towards Honesty. — One who is
openly honest towards himself ends by being rather
conceited about this honesty. He knows only too
well why he is honest — for the same reason that
another man prefers outward show and hypocrisy.

57.
COALS of Fire. — The heaping of coals of fire on
another's head is generally misunderstood and falls
flat, because the other knows himself to be just as
much in the right, and on his side too has thought
of collecting coals.

58.
Dangerous Books.— A man says: "Judging
from my own case, I find that this book is harmful."
Let him but wait, and perhaps one day he will con-
fess that the book did him a great service by thrust-
ing forward and bringing to light the hidden disease
of his soul. — Altered opinions alter not at all (or
very little) the character of a man : but they illu-
minate individual facets of his personality, which
hitherto, in another constellation of opinions, had
remained dark and unrecognisable.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 39
59.

Simulated Pity. — We simulate pity when we
wish to show ourselves superior to the feeling of
animosity, but generally in vain. This point is not
noticed without a considerable enhancement of that
feeling of animosity.

60.

Open Contradiction often Conciliatory.
— At the moment when a man openly makes known
his difference of opinion from a well-known party
leader, the whole world thinks that he must be
angry with the latter. Sometimes, however, he is
just on the point of ceasing to be angry with him.
He ventures to put himself on the same plane as
his opponent, and is free from the tortures of sup-
pressed envy.

61.

Seeing our Light Shining. — In the darkest
hour of depression, sickness, and guilt, we are still
glad to see others taking a light from us and making
use of us as of the disk of the moon. By this round-
about route we derive some light from our own illu-
minating faculty.

62.

Fellowship in Joy.*— The snake that stings
us means to hurt us and rejoices in so doing : the
lowest animal can picture to itself the pain of others.

* The German word \Mitfrende^ coined by Nietzsche in
opposition to Mitleid (sympathy), is untranslateable. — Tr.



40 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

But to picture to oneself the joy of others and to
rejoice thereat is the highest privilege of the highest
animals, and again, amongst them, is the property-
only of the most select specimens — accordingly a
rare " human thing." Hence there have been philo-
sophers who denied fellowship in joy.

63.
Supplementary Pregnancy.— Thosewhohave
arrived at works and deeds are in an obscure way,
they know not how, all the more pregnant with them,
as if to prove supplementarily that these are their
children and not those of chance.

64.
Hard-hearted from Vanity. — Just as justice
is so often a cloak for weakness, so men who are
fairly intelligent, but weak, sometimes attempt dis-
simulation from ambitious motives and purposely
show themselves unjust and hard, in order to leave
behind them the impression of strength.

65.

Humiliation. — If in a large sack of profit we
find a single grain of humiliation we still make a
wry face even at our good luck.

66.
Extreme Herostratism.*— There might be

* Herostratus of Ephesus (in 356 B.C.) set fire to the temple
of Diana in order (as he confessed on the rack) to gain
notoriety. — Tr.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 41

Herostratuses who set fire to their own temple, in
which their images are honoured.



6 7 .

A World of Diminutives. — The fact that all
that is weak and in need of help appeals to the
heart induces in us the habit of designating by-
diminutive and softening terms all that appeals to
our hearts — and accordingly making such things
weak and clinging to our imaginations.



68.

The Bad Characteristic of Sympathy. —
Sympathy has a peculiar impudence for its com-
panion. For, wishing to help at all costs, sympathy-
is in no perplexity either as to the means of assist-
ance or as to the nature and cause of the disease,
and goes on courageously administering all its
quack medicines to restore the health and reputa-
tion of the patient.

69.

IMPORTUNACY. — There is even an importunacy
in relation to works, and the act of associating one-
self from early youth on an intimate footing with
the illustrious works of all times evinces an entire
absence of shame. — Others are only importunate
from ignorance, not knowing with whom they have
to do — for instance classical scholars young and old
in relation to the works of the Greeks.



42 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

70.

The Will is Ashamed of the Intellect.—
In all coolness we make reasonable plans against
our passions. But we make the most serious mis-
take in this connection in being often ashamed,
when the design has to be carried out, of the cool-
ness and calculation with which we conceived it.
So we do just the unreasonable thing, from that
sort of defiant magnanimity that every passion in-
volves.

Why the Sceptics Offend Morality. — He
who takes his morality solemnly and seriously is
enraged against the sceptics in the domain of morals.
For where he lavishes all his force, he wishes others
to marvel but not to investigate and doubt. Then
there are natures whose last shred of morality is
just the belief in morals. They behave in the same
way towards sceptics, if possible still more passion-
ately.

72.

SHYNESS. — All moralists are shy, because they
know they are confounded with spies and traitors,
so soon as their penchant is noticed. Besides, they
are generally conscious of being impotent in action,
for in the midst of work the motives of their activity
almost withdraw their attention from the work.

73>
A Danger to Universal Morality.-— People
who are at the same time noble and honest come






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 43

to deify every devilry that brings out their honesty,
and to suspend for a time the balance of their moral
judgment.

74-
The Saddest Error. — It is an unpardonable
offence when one discovers that where one was con-
vinced of being loved, one is only regarded as a
household utensil and decoration, whereby the
master of the house can find an outlet for his
vanity before his guests.

75-
Love and Duality. — What else is love but
understanding and rejoicing that another lives,
works, and feels in a different and opposite way to
ourselves ? That love may be able to bridge over
the contrasts by joys, w.e must not remove or deny
those contrasts. Even self-love presupposes an irre-
concileable duality (or plurality) in one person.

76.

Signs from Dreams. — What one sometimes
does not know and feel accurately in waking hours
— whether one has a good or a bad conscience as
regards some person — is revealed completely and
unambiguously by dreams.

77-
Debauchery. — Not joy but joylessness is the
mother of debauchery.



44 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

78.

Reward and Punishment. — No one accuses
without an underlying notion of punishment and
revenge, even when he accuses his fate or himself.
All complaint is accusation, all self-congratulation
is praise. Whether we do one or the other, we
always make some one responsible.

79-
Doubly Unjust. — We sometimes advance truth
by a twofold injustice : when we see and represent
consecutively the two sides of a case which we are
not in a position to see together, but in such a way
that every time we mistake or deny the other side,
fancying that what we see is the whole truth.

8o.

MISTRUST. — Self-mistrust does not always pro-
ceed uncertainly and shyly, but sometimes in a
furious rage, having worked itself into a frenzy in
order not to tremble.

8i.

Philosophy of Parvenus. — If you want to be
a personality you must even hold your shadow in
honour.

82.

Knowing how to Wash Oneself Clean.—
We must know how to emerge cleaner from unclean
conditions, and, if necessary, how to wash ourselves
even with dirty water.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 45
S3-

Letting Yourself Go. — The more you let
yourself go, the less others let you go.

84.

The Innocent Rogue.— There is a slow, grad-
ual path to vice and rascality of every description.
In the end, the traveller is quite abandoned by the
insect-swarms of a bad conscience, and although a
thorough scoundrel he walks in innocence.

85.
Making Plans. — Making plans and conceiving
projects involves many agreeable sentiments. He
that had the strength to be nothing but a contriver
of plans all his life would be a happy man. But
one must occasionally have a rest from this activity
by carrying a plan into execution, and then comes
anger and sobriety.

S6.

Wherewith We See the Ideal. — Every effi-
cient man is blocked by his efficiency and cannot
look out freely from its prison. Had he not also
a goodly share of imperfection, he could, by reason
of his virtue, never arrive at an intellectual or moral
freedom. Our shortcomings are the eyes with
which we see the ideal.

87.
Dishonest Praise.— Dishonest praise causes
many more twinges of conscience than dishonest



46 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

blame, probably only because we have exposed our
capacity for judgment far more completely through
excessive praise than through excessive and unjust
blame.

88.

How One Dies is Indifferent. — The whole
way in which a man thinks of death during the prime
of his life and strength is very expressive and sig-
nificant for what we call his character. But the hour
of death itself, his behaviour on the death-bed, is
almost indifferent. The exhaustion of waning life,
especially when old people die, the irregular or in-
sufficient nourishment of the brain during this last
period, the occasionally violent pain, the novel and
untried nature of the whole position, and only too
often the ebb and flow of superstitious impressions
and fears, as if dying were of much consequence and
meant the crossing of bridges of the most terrible
kind — all this forbids our using death as a testimony
concerning the living. Nor is it true that the dying
man is generally more honest than the living. On
the contrary, through the solemn attitude of the
bystanders, the repressed or flowing streams of tears
and emotions, every one is inveigled into a comedy
of vanity, now conscious, now unconscious. The
serious way in which every dying man is treated
must have been to many a poor despised devil the
highest joy of his whole life and a sort of compensa-
tion and repayment for many privations.

89.
Morality and its Sacrifice. — The origin of
morality may be traced to two ideas : " The com-






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 47

munity is of more value than the individual," and
" The permanent interest is to be preferred to the
temporary." The conclusion drawn is that the per-
manent interest of the community is unconditionally
to be set above the temporary interest of the indi-
vidual, especially his momentary well-being, but also
his permanent interest and even the prolongation
of his existence. Even if the individual suffers
by an arrangement that suits the mass, even if he
is depressed and ruined by it, morality must be
maintained and the victim brought to the sacrifice.
Such a trend of thought arises, however, only in
those who are not the victims — for in the victim's
case it enforces the claim that the individual might
be worth more than the many, and that the present
enjoyment, the " moment in paradise," * should per-
haps be rated higher than a tame succession of
untroubled or comfortable circumstances. But the
philosophy of the sacrificial victim always finds voice
too late, and so victory remains with morals and
morality : which are really nothing more than the
sentiment for the whole concept of morals under
which one lives and has been reared — and reared
not as an individual but as a member of the whole,
as a cipher in a majority. Hence it constantly
happens that the individual makes himself into a
majority by means of his morality.

90.

The Good and the Good Conscience.— You
hold that all good things have at all times had a

* Quotation from Schiller, Don Carlos, i. 5.— Tr.



48 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

good conscience? Science, which is certainly a
very good thing, has come into the world without
such a conscience and quite free from all pathos,
rather clandestinely, by roundabout ways, walking
with shrouded or masked face like a sinner, and
always with the feeling at least of being a smuggler.
Good conscience has bad conscience for its stepping-
stone, not for its opposite. For all that is good has
at one time been new and consequently strange,
against morals, immoral, and has gnawed like a
worm at the heart of the fortunate discoverer.



91.

Success Sanctifies the Intentions. — We
should not shrink from treading the road to a virtue,
even when we see clearly that nothing but egotism,
and accordingly utility, personal comfort, fear, con-
siderations of health, reputation, or glory, are the
impelling motives. These motives are styled ignoble
and selfish. Very well, but if they stimulate us to
some virtue — for example, self-denial, dutifulness,
order, thrift, measure, and moderation — let us listen
to them, whatever their epithets may be ! For if
we reach the goal to which they summon us, then
the virtue we have attained, by means of the pure
air it makes us breathe and the spiritual well-being
it communicates, ennobles the remoter impulses of
our action, and afterwards we no longer perform
those actions from the same coarse motives that
inspired us before. — Education should therefore force
the virtues on the pupil, as far as possible, according
to his disposition. Then virtue, the sunshine and



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 49

summer atmosphere of the soul, can contribute her
own share of work and add mellowness and sweet-
ness.

92.

Dabblers in Christianity, not Christians.
— So that is your Christianity ! — To annoy humanity
you praise "God and His Saints," and again when
you want to praise humanity you go so far that
God and His Saints must be annoyed. — I wish you
would at least learn Christian manners, as you are
so deficient in the civility of the Christian heart.

93.
The Religious and Irreligious Impression
OF Nature. — A true believer must be to us an
object of veneration, but the same holds good of a
true, sincere, convinced unbeliever. With men of
the latter stamp we are near to the high mountains
where mighty rivers have their source, and with
believers we are under vigorous, shady, restful trees.

94-
Judicial Murder.— The two greatest judicial
murders * in the world's history are, to speak without
exaggeration, concealed and well-concealed suicide.
In both cases a man willed to die, and in both cases
he let his breast be pierced by the sword in the
hand of human injustice.

95-
" Love." — The finest artistic conception wherein
Christianity had the advantage over other religious

* This, of course, refers to Jesus and Socrates. — Tr.
vol. 11. D



50 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

systems lay in one word — Love. Hence it became
the lyric religion (whereas in its two other creations
Semitism bestowed heroico-epical religions upon
the world). In the word " love " there is so much
meaning, so much that stimulates and appeals to
memory and hope, that even the meanest intelli-
gence and the coldest heart feel some glimmering
of its sense. The cleverest woman and the lowest
man think of the comparatively unselfish moments
of their whole life, even if with them Eros never
soared high : and the vast number of beings who
miss love from their parents or children or sweet-
hearts, especially those whose sexual instincts have
been refined away, have found their heart's desire
in Christianity.

96.

The Fulfilment of Christianity. — In
Christianity there is also an Epicurean trend of
thought, starting from the idea that God can only
demand of man, his creation and his image, what it
is possible for man to fulfil, and accordingly that
Christian virtue and perfection are attainable and
often attained., Now, for instance, the belief in loving
one's enemies — even if it is only a belief or fancy,
and by no means a psychological reality (a real
love) — gives unalloyed happiness, so long as it is
genuinely believed. (As to the reason of this,
psychologist and Christian might well differ.)
Hence earthly life, through the belief, I mean the
fancy, that it satisfies not only the injunction to
love our enemies, but all the other injunctions of
Christianity, and that it has really assimilated



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 5 1

and embodied in itself the Divine perfection accord-
ing to the command, " Be perfect as your Father
in heaven is perfect," might actually become a
holy life. Thus error can make Christ's promise
come true.

97-

Of the Future of Christianity.— We may
be allowed to form a conjecture as to the dis-
appearance of Christianity and as to the places
where it will be the slowest to retreat, if we con-
sider where and for what reasons Protestantism
spread with such startling rapidity. As is well
known, Protestantism promised to do far more
cheaply all that the old Church did, without costly
masses, pilgrimages, and priestly pomp and circum-
stance. It spread particularly among the Northern
nations, which were not so deeply rooted as those
of the South in the old Church's symbolism and
love of ritual. In the South the more powerful
pagan religion survived in Christianity, whereas in
the North Christianity meant an opposition to
and a break with the old-time creed, and hence
was from the first more thoughtful and less sensual,
but for that very reason, in times of peril, more
fanatical and more obstinate. If from the stand-
point of thought we succeed in uprooting Christi-
anity, we can at once know the point where it will
begin to disappear — the very point at which it will
be most stubborn in defence. In other places it
will bend but not break, lose its leaves but burst
into leaf afresh, because the senses, and not thought,
have gone over to its side. But it is the senses



52 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that maintain the belief that with all its expensive
outlay the Church is more cheaply and conveniently
managed than under the stern conditions of work
and wages. Yet what does one hold leisure (or
semi-idleness) to be worth, when once one has be-
come accustomed to it ? The senses plead against
a dechristianised world, saying that there would
be too much work to do in it and an insufficient
supply of leisure. They take the part of magic —
that is, they let God work himself [premus nos, Deus
laboret).

98.
Theatricality and Honesty of Un-
believers. — There is no book that contains in
such abundance or expresses so faithfully all that
man occasionally finds salutary — ecstatic inward
happiness, ready for sacrifice or death in the belief
in and contemplation of his truth — as the book
that tells of Christ. From that book a clever man
may learn all the means whereby a book can be
made into a world-book, a vade-mecum for all, and
especially that master-means of representing every-
thing as discovered, nothing as future and uncertain.
All influential books try to leave the same impres-
sion, as if the widest intellectual horizon were cir-
cumscribed here and as if about the sun that shines
here every constellation visible at present or in the
future must revolve. — Must not then all purely
scientific books be poor in influence on the same
grounds as such books are rich in influence? Is
not the book fated to live humble and among
humble folk, in order to be crucified in the end
and never resurrected? In relation to what the



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 53

religious inform us of their " knowledge " and their
"holy spirit," are not all upright men of science
" poor in spirit " ? Can any religion demand more
self-denial and draw the selfish out of themselves
more inexorably than science ? — This and similar
things we may say, in any case with a certain
theatricality, when we have to defend ourselves
against believers, for it is impossible to conduct a
defence without a certain amount of theatricality.
But between ourselves our language must be more
honest, and we employ a freedom that those be-
lievers are not even allowed, in their own interests,
to understand. Away, then, with the monastic
cowl of self-denial, with the appearance of humility !
Much more and much better — so rings our truth !
If science were not linked with the pleasure of
knowledge, the utility of the thing known, what
should we care for science? If a little faith, love,
and hope did not lead our souls to knowledge,
what would attract us to science ? And if in science
the ego means nothing, still the inventive, happy
ego, every upright and industrious ego, means a
great deal in the republic of the men of science.
The homage of those who pay homage, the joy of
those whom we wish well or honour, in some cases
glory and a fair share of immortality, is the personal
reward for every suppression of personality : to say
nothing here of meaner views and rewards, although
it is just on this account that the majority have sworn
and always continue to swear fidelity to the laws of
the republic and of science. If we had not remained
in some degree unscientific, what would science
matter to us? Taking everything together and



54 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

speaking in plain language : " To a purely knowing
being knowledge would be indifferent." — Not the
quality but the quantity of faith and devoutness
distinguishes us from the pious, the believers. We
are content with less. But should one of them cry
out to us : " Be content and show yourselves con-
tented ! " we could easily answer : "As a matter
of fact, we do not belong to the most discontented
class. But you, if your faith makes you happy,
show yourselves to be happy. Your faces have
always done more harm to your faith than our
reasons ! If that glad message of your Bible were
written in your faces, you would not need to de-
mand belief in the authority of that book in such
stiff-necked fashion. Your words, your actions
should continually make the Bible superfluous — in
fact, through you a new Bible should continually
come into being. As it is, your apologia for
Christianity is rooted in your unchristianity, and
with your defence you write your own condemna-
tion. If you, however, should wish to emerge from
your dissatisfaction with Christianity, you should
ponder over the experience of two thousand years,
which, clothed in the modest form of a question,
may be voiced as follows : " If Christ really in-
tended to redeem the world, may he not be said
to have failed ? "

99-

The Poet as Guide to the Future. — All

the surplus poetical force that still exists in modern

humanity, but is not used under our conditions of

life, should (without any deduction) be devoted to






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 55

a definite goal — not to depicting the present nor to
reviving and summarising the past, but to pointing
the way to the future. Nor should this be so
done as if the poet, like an imaginative political
economist, had to anticipate a more favourable
national and social state of things and picture their
realisation. Rather will he, just as the earlier
poets portrayed the images of the Gods, portray
the fair images of men. He will divine those cases
where, in the midst of our modern world and reality
(which will not be shirked or repudiated in the
usual poetic fashion), a great, noble soul is still
possible, where it may be embodied in harmonious,
equable conditions, where it may become perma-
nent, visible, and representative of a type, and so, by
the stimulus to imitation and envy, help to create
the future. The poems of such a poet would be
distinguished by appearing secluded and protected
from the heated atmosphere of the passions. The
irremediable failure, the shattering of all the strings
of the human instrument, the scornful laughter and
gnashing of teeth, and all tragedy and comedy in
the usual old sense, would appear by the side of
this new art as mere archaic lumber, a blurring of
the outlines of the world-picture. Strength, kind-
ness, gentleness, purity, and an unsought, innate
moderation in the personalities and their action : a
levelled soil, giving rest and pleasure to the foot : a
shining heaven mirrored in faces and events : science
and art welded into a new unity : the mind living
together with her sister, the soul, without arrogance
or jealousy, and enticing from contrasts the grace
of seriousness, not the impatience of discord — all



56 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

this would be the general environment, the back-
ground on which the delicate differences of the em-
bodied ideals would make the real picture, that of
ever-growing human majesty. Many roads to this
poetry of the future start from Goethe, but the quest
needs good pathfinders and above all a far greater
strength than is possessed by modern poets, who
unscrupulously represent the half-animal and the
immaturity and intemperance that are mistaken
by them for power and naturalness.

ioo.
The Muse as Penthesilea * — " Better to rot
than to be a woman without charm." When once
the Muse thinks thus, the end of her art is again
at hand. But it can be a tragic and also a comic
finale.

101.
The Circuitous Path to the Beautiful. —
If the beautiful is to be identified with that which
gives pleasure — and thus sang the Muses once —
the useful is often the necessary circuitous path
to the beautiful, and has a perfect right to spurn
the short-sighted censure of men who live for the
moment, who will not wait, and who think that
they can reach all good things without ever taking
a circuitous path.

102.

An Excuse for many a Transgression.— The
ceaseless desire to create, the eternal looking out-

* Queen of the Amazons, slain by Achilles in the Trojan
War.— Tr.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. $7

ward of the artist, hinders him from becoming better
and more beautiful as a personality : unless his crav-
ing for glory be great enough to compel him to
exhibit in his relations with other men a growth
corresponding to the growing beauty and greatness
of his works. In any case he has but a limited
measure of strength, and how could the proportion
of strength that he spends on himself be of any
benefit to his work — or vice versa ?

103.

Satisfying the Best People. — If we have sat-
isfied the best people of our time with our art, it is
a sign that we shall not satisfy the best people of
the succeeding period. We have indeed " lived for
all time," and the applause of the best people ensures
our fame.*

104.

Of One Substance. — If we are of one substance
with a book or a work of art, we think in our heart
of hearts that it must be excellent, and are offended
if others find it ugly, over-spiced, or pretentious.

105.

Speech and Emotion. — That speech is not given

to us to communicate our emotions may be seen

from the fact that all simple men are ashamed to

seek for words to express their deeper feelings. These

* From Schiller, Wallensteiii s Lager : " Wer den Besten
seiner Zeit genug gethan, der hat gelebt fur alle Zeiten"
(" He that has satisfied the best men of his time has lived for
all time ").



58 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

feelings are expressed only in actions, and even here
such men blush if others seem to divine their motives.
After all, among poets, to whom God generally
denies this shame, the more noble are more mono-
syllabic in the language of emotion, and evince a
certain constraint : whereas the real poets of emotion
are for the most part shameless in practical life.

1 06.

A Mistake about a Privation.— He that has
not for a long time been completely weaned from an
art, and is still always at home in it, has no idea how
small a privation it is to live without that art.

107.

Three-quarter Strength. — A work that is
meant to give an impression of health should be
produced with three-quarters, at the most, of the
strength of its creator. If he has gone to his farthest
limit, the work excites the observer and disconcerts
him by its tension. All good things have some-
thing lazy about them and lie like cows in the
meadow.

108.

Refusing to have Hunger as a Guest.— As
refined fare serves a hungry man as well as and no
better than coarser food, the more pretentious artist
will not dream of inviting the hungry man to his
meal.

109.

Living without Art and Wine. — It is with
works of art as with wine — it is better if one can do



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 59

without both and keep to water, and if from the
inner fire and inner sweetness of the soul the water
spontaneously changes again into wine.



no.

The Pirate-Genius.— The pirate-genius in art,
who even knows how to deceive subtle minds, arises
when some one unscrupulously and from youth up-
wards regards all good things, that are not protected
by law, as the property of a particular person, as his
legitimate spoil. Now all the good things of past
ages and masters lie free around us, hedged about
and protected by the reverential awe of the few who
know them. To these few our robber-genius, by
the force of his impudence, bids defiance and ac-
cumulates for himself a wealth that once more calls
forth homage and awe.



in.

To the Poets of Great Towns. — In the gar-
dens of modern poetry it will clearly be observed
that the sewers of great towns are too near. With
the fragrance of flowers is mingled something that
betrays abomination and putrescence. With pain I
ask : " Must you poets always request wit and dirt
to stand godfather, when an innocent and beautiful
sensation has to be christened by you ? Are you
obliged to dress your noble goddess in a hood of
devilry and caricature ? But whence this necessity,
this obligation ? " The reason is — because you live
too near the sewers.



DO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

112.

Of the Salt of Speech.— No one has ever
explained why the Greek writers, having at com-
mand such an unparalleled wealth and power of
language, made so sparing a use of their resources
that every post-classical Greek book appears by
comparison crude, over-coloured, and extravagant.
It is said that towards the North Polar ice and
in the hottest countries salt is becoming less and
less used, whereas on the other hand the dwellers
on the plains and by the coast in the more temper-
ate zones use salt in great abundance. Is it possible
that the Greeks from a twofold reason — because
their intellect was colder and clearer but their fun-
damental passionate nature far more tropical than
ours — did not need salt and spice to the same extent
that we do ?

113.
The Freest Writer. — In a book for free spirits
one cannot avoid mention of Laurence Sterne, the
man whom Goethe honoured as the freest spirit of
his century. May he be satisfied with the honour of
being called the freest writer of all times, in com-
parison with whom all others appear stiff, square-
toed, intolerant, and downright boorish ! In his case
we should not speak of the clear and rounded but
of "the endless melody" — if by this phrase we arrive
at a name for an artistic style in which the definite
form is continually broken, thrust aside and trans-
ferred to the realm of the indefinite, so that it
signifies one and the other at the same time. Sterne
is the great master of double entendre, this phrase



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 6l

being naturally used in a far wider sense than is
commonly done when one applies it to sexual
relations. We may give up for lost the reader
who always wants to know exactly what Sterne
thinks about a matter, and whether he be making
a serious or a smiling face (for he can do both
with one wrinkling of his features ; he can be and
even wishes to be right and wrong at the same
moment, to interweave profundity and farce). His
digressions are at once continuations and further
developments of the story, his maxims contain a
satire on all that is sententious, his dislike of
seriousness is bound up with a disposition to take no
matter merely externally and on the surface. So in
the proper reader he arouses a feeling of uncertainty
whether he be walking, lying, or standing, a feeling
most closely akin to that of floating in the air. He,
the most versatile of writers, communicates some-
thing of this versatility to his reader. Yes, Sterne
unexpectedly changes the parts, and is often as much
reader as author, his book being like a play within a
play, a theatre audience before another theatre audi-
ence. We must surrender at discretion to the mood
of Sterne, although we can always expect it to be
gracious. It is strangely instructive to see how so
great a writer as Diderot has affected this double
entendre of Sterne's — to be equally ambiguous
throughout is just the Sternian super-humour. Did
Diderot imitate, admire, ridicule, or parody Sterne
in his Jacques le Fataliste} One cannot be exactly
certain, and this uncertainty was perhaps intended
by the author. This very doubt makes the French
unjust to the work of one of their first masters, one



62 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

who need not be ashamed of comparison with any
of the ancients or moderns. For humour (and
especially for this humorous attitude towards
humour itself) the French are too serious. Is it
necessary to add that of all great authors Sterne is
the worst model, in fact the inimitable author, and
that even Diderot had to pay for his daring ? What
the worthy Frenchmen and before them some
Greeks and Romans aimed at and attained in prose
is the very opposite of what Sterne aims at and
attains. He raises himself as a masterly exception
above all that artists in writing demand of them-
selves — propriety, reserve, character, steadfastness
of purpose, comprehensiveness, perspicuity, good
deportment in gait and feature. Unfortunately
Sterne the man seems to have been only too closely
related to Sterne the writer. His squirrel-soul
sprang with insatiable unrest from branch to
branch ; he knew what lies between sublimity and
rascality ; he had sat on every seat, always with un-
abashed watery eyes and mobile play of feature.
He was — if language does not revolt from such a
combination — of a hard-hearted kindness, and in
the midst of the joys of a grotesque and even cor-
rupt imagination he showed the bashful grace of
innocence. Such a carnal and spiritual hermaphro-
ditism, such untrammelled wit penetrating into
every vein and muscle, was perhaps never possessed
by any other man.

114.

A Choice Reality. — Just as the good prose
writer only takes words that belong to the language
of daily intercourse, though not by a long way all



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 63

its words — whence arises a choice style — so the
good poet of the future will only represent the real
and turn his eyes away from all fantastic, supersti-
tious, half-voiced, forgotten stories, to which earlier
poets devoted their powers. Only reality, though
by a long way not every reality — but a choice
reality.

115.
Degenerate Species of Art. — Side by side
with the genuine species of art, those of great repose
and great movement, there are degenerate species
— weary, blase" art and excited art. Both would
have their weakness taken for strength and wish to
be confounded with the genuine species.

116.

A Hero Impossible from Lack of Colour. —
The typical poets and artists of our age like to
compose their pictures upon a background of shim-
mering red, green, grey, and gold, on the back-
ground of nervous sensuality — a condition well
understood by the children of this century. The
drawback comes when we do not look at these pic-
tures with the eyes of our century. Then we see that
the great figures painted by these artists have some-
thing flickering, tremulous, and dizzy about them,
and accordingly we do not ascribe to them heroic
deeds, but at best mock-heroic, swaggering rawdeeds.

117.
Overladen Style. — The overladen style is a
consequence of the impoverishment of the organis-



64 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ing force together with a lavish stock of expedients
and intentions. At the beginnings of art the very-
reverse conditions sometimes appear.



118.

Pulchrum est paucorum hominum. — History
and experience tell us that the significant grotesque-
ness that mysteriously excites the imagination and
carries one beyond everyday reality, is older and
grows more luxuriantly than the beautiful and re-
verence for the beautiful in art : and that it begins
to flourish exceedingly when the sense for beauty
is on the wane. For the vast majority of mankind
this grotesque seems to be a higher need than the
beautiful, presumably because it contains a coarser
narcotic.

119.

Origins of Taste in Works of Art.— If we
consider the primary germs of the artistic sense, and
ask ourselves what are the various kinds of joy
produced by the firstlings of art — as, for example,
among savage tribes — we find first of all the joy
of understanding what another means. Art in this
case is a sort of conundrum, which causes its solver
pleasure in his own quick and keen perceptions. —
Then the roughest works of art remind us of the
pleasant things we have actually experienced, and
so give joy — as, for example, when the artist alludes
to a chase, a victory, a wedding. — Again, the repre-
sentation may cause us to feel excited, touched, in-
flamed, as for instance in the glorification of revenge



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 65

and danger. Here the enjoyment lies in the ex-
citement itself, in the victory over tedium. — The
memory, too, of unpleasant things, so far as they
have been overcome or make us appear interesting
to the listener as subjects for art (as when the
singer describes the mishaps of a daring seaman),
can inspire great joy, the credit for which is given
to art. — A more subtle variety is the joy that
arises at the sight of all that is regular and sym-
metrical in lines, points, and rhythms. For by a
certain analogy is awakened the feeling for all that
is orderly and regular in life, which one has to thank
alone for all well-being. So in the cult of symmetry
we unconsciously do homage to rule and proportion
as the source of our previous happiness, and the joy
in this case is a kind of hymn of thanksgiving.
Only when a certain satiety of the last-mentioned
joy arises does a more subtle feeling step in, that
enjoyment might even lie in a violation of the
symmetrical and regular. This feeling, for example,
impels us to seek reason in apparent unreason, and
the sort of aesthetic riddle-guessing that results is in
a way the higher species of the first-named artistic
joy. — He who pursues this speculation still further
will know what kind of hypotheses for the ex-
planation of aesthetic phenomena are hereby funda-
mentally rejected.



120.

Not too Near. — It is a disadvantage for good
thoughts when they follow too closely on one
another, for they hide the view from each other.
vol. 11. E



>



66 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






That is why great artists and writers have made an
abundant use of the mediocre.



121.

Roughness and Weakness. — Artists of all
periods have made the discovery that in roughness
lies a certain strength, and that not every one can be
rough who wants to be : also that many varieties of
weakness have a powerful effect on the emotions.
From this source are derived many artistic substi-
tutes, which not even the greatest and most con-
scientious artists can abstain from using.

122.

Good Memory. — Many a man fails to become
a thinker for the sole reason that his memory is too
good.

123.

Arousing instead of Appeasing Hunger. —
Great artists fancy that they have taken full pos-
session of a soul. In reality, and often to their
painful disappointment, that soul has only been
made more capacious and insatiable, so that a dozen
greater artists could plunge into its depths without
filling it up.

124.

Artists' Anxiety. — The anxiety lest people
may not believe that their figures are alive can mis-
lead many artists of declining taste to portray these
figures so that they appear as if mad. From the



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 6y

same anxiety, on the other hand, Greek artists of
the earliest ages gave even dead and sorely wounded
men that smile which they knew as the most vivid
sign of life — careless of the actual forms bestowed
by nature on life at its last gasp.

125.

The Circle must be Completed. — He who
follows a philosophy or a genre of art to the end of
its career and beyond, understands from inner ex-
perience why the masters and disciples who come
after have so often turned, with a depreciatory ges-
ture, into a new groove. The circle must be de-
scribed — but the individual, even the greatest, sits
firm on his point of the circumference, with an in-
exorable look of obstinacy, as if the circle ought
never to be completed.

126.

The Older Art and the Soul of the
Present. — Since every art becomes more and more
adapted to the expression of spiritual states, of the
more lively, delicate, energetic, and passionate states,
the later masters, spoilt by these means of expres-
sion, do not feel at their ease in the presence of the
old-time works of art. They feel as if the ancients
had merely been lacking in the means of making
their souls speak clearly, also perhaps in some neces-
sary technical preliminaries. They think that they
must render some assistance in this quarter, for

tthey believe in the similarity or even unity of all
souls. In truth, however, measure, symmetry, a



68 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






contempt for graciousness and charm, an uncon-
scious severity and morning chilliness, an evasion
of passion, as if passion meant the death of art —
such are the constituents of sentiment and morality
in all old masters, who selected and arranged their
means of expression not at random but in a neces-
sary connection with their morality. Knowing this,
are we to deny those that come after the right to
animate the older works with their soul ? No, for
these works can only survive through our giving
them our soul, and our blood alone enables them
to speak to us. The real "historic" discourse would
talk ghostly speech to ghosts. We honour the great
artists less by that barren timidity that allows every
word, every note to remain intact than by energetic
endeavours to aid them continually to a new life. —
True, if Beethoven were suddenly to come to life
and hear one of his works performed with that
modern animation and nervous refinement that bring
glory to our masters of execution, he would probably
be silent for a long while, uncertain whether he should
raise his hand to curse or to bless, but perhaps say
at last : " Well, well ! That is neither I nor not-I, but
a third thing — it seems to me, too, something right,
if not just the tight thing. But you must know your-
selves what to do, as in any case it is you who have
to listen. As our Schiller says, ' the living man is
right.' So have it your own way, and let me go
down again."

127.

Against the Disparagers of Brevity. — A
brief dictum may be the fruit and harvest of long



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 69

reflection. The reader, however, who is a novice
in this field and has never considered the case in
point, sees something embryonic in all brief dicta,
not without a reproachful hint to the author, request-
ing him not to serve up such raw and ill-prepared
food.

128.

Against the Short-Sighted. — Do you think
it is piece-work because it is (and must be) offered
you in pieces ?

129.

Readers of Aphorisms. — The worst readers of
aphorisms are the friends of the author, if they make
a point of referring the general to the particular
instance to which the aphorism owes its origin.
This namby-pamby attitude brings all the author's
trouble to naught, and instead of a philosophic lesson
and a philosophic frame of mind, they deservedly
gain nothing but the satisfaction of a vulgar curi-
osity.

130.

Readers' Insults. — The reader offers a two-
fold insult to the author by praising his second book
at the expense of his first (or vice versa) and by ex-
pecting the author to be grateful to him on that
account.

131.
The Exciting Element in the History of
Art. — We fall into a state of terrible tension when
we follow the history of an art — as, for example, that



70 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






of Greek oratory — and, passing from master to master,
observe their increasing precautions to obey the old
and the new laws and all these self-imposed limita-
tions. We see that the bow must snap, and that the
so-called " loose " composition, with the wonderful
means of expression smothered and concealed (in
this particular case the florid style of Asianism), was
once necessary and almost beneficial.

132.

To the Great in Art. — That enthusiasm for
some object which you, O great man, introduce into
this world causes the intelligence of the many to be
stunted. The knowledge of this fact spells humilia-
tion. But the enthusiast wears his hump with pride
and pleasure, and you have the consolation of feeling
that you have increased the world's happiness.

133.

Conscienceless ^Esthetes.— The real fanatics
of an artistic school are perhaps those utterly in-
artistic natures that are not even grounded in the
elements of artistic study and creation, but are im-
pressed with the strongest of all the elementary
influences of an art. For them there is no aesthetic
conscience — hence nothing to hold them back from
fanaticism.

134.
How the Soul should be Moved by the
New Music. — The artistic purpose followed by the
new music, in what is now forcibly but none too






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 7 1

lucidly termed " endless melody," can be understood
by going into the sea, gradually losing one's firm
tread on the bottom, and finally surrendering uncon-
ditionally to the fluid element. One has to swim.
In the previous, older music one was forced, with
delicate or stately or impassioned movement, to
dance. The measure necessary for dancing, the ob-
servance of a distinct balance of time and force
in the soul of the hearer, imposed a continual self-
control. Through the counteraction of the cooler
draught of air which came from this caution and the
warmer breath of musical enthusiasm, that music
exercised its spell. — Richard Wagner aimed at a
different excitation of the soul, allied, as above said,
to swimming and floating. This is perhaps the most
essential of his innovations. His famous method,
originating from this aim and adapted to it — the
" endless melody " — strives to break and sometimes
even to despise all mathematical equilibrium of time
and force. He is only too rich in the invention of
such effects, which sound to the old school like
rhythmic paradoxes and blasphemies. He dreads
petrifaction, crystallisation, the development of
music into the architectural. He accordingly sets
up a three-time rhythm in opposition to the double-
time, not infrequently introduces five-time and seven-
time, immediately repeats a phrase, but with a pro-
lation, so that its time is again doubled and trebled.
From an easy-going imitation of such art may arise
a great danger to music, for by the side of the super-
abundance of rhythmic emotion demoralisation and
decadence lurk in ambush. The danger will become
very great if such music comes to associate itself



72 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

more and more closely with a quite naturalistic
art of acting and pantomime, trained and dominated
by no higher plastic models ; an art that knows no
measure in itself and can impart no measure to the
kindred element, the all-too-womanish nature of
music,

135.
Poet and Reality. — The Muse of the poet who
is not in love with reality will not be reality, and
will bear him children with hollow eyes and all too
tender bones.

136.

Means and End. — In art the end does not justify
the means, but holy means can justify the end.

137.
The Worst Readers. — The worst readers are
those who act like plundering soldiers. They take
out some things that they might use, cover the rest
with filth and confusion, and blaspheme about the
whole.

138.

Signs of a Good Writer. — Good writers have
two things in common: they prefer being understood
to being admired, and they do not write for the
critical and over-shrewd reader.



139.
The Mixed Species. — The mixed species in art
bear witness to their authors' distrust of their own



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 73

strength. They seek auxiliary powers, advocates,
hiding-places — such is the case with the poet who
calls in philosophy, the musician who calls in the
drama, and the thinker who calls in rhetoric to his aid.



140.

Shutting One's Mouth.— When his book
opens its mouth, the author must shut his.



141.

Badges of Rank.— All poets and men of letters
who are in love with the superlative want to do more
than they can.

142.

COLD Books. — The deep thinker reckons on
readers who feel with him the happiness that lies
in deep thinking. Hence a book that looks cold
and sober, if seen in the right light, may seem bathed
in the sunshine of spiritual cheerfulness and become
a genuine soul-comforter.



143.

A Knack of the Slow- Witted.— The slow-
witted thinker generally allies himself with loqua-
city and ceremoniousness. By the former he thinks
he is gaining mobility and fluency, by the latter he
gives his peculiarity the appearance of being a result
of free will and artistic purpose, with a view to
dignity, which needs slow movement.



74 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



144-

Le Style Baroque* — He who as thinker and
writer is not born or trained to dialectic and the conse-
cutive arrangement of ideas, will unconsciously turn
to the rhetoric and dramatic forms. For, after all, his
object is to make himself understood and to carry the
day by force, and he is indifferent whether, as shep-
herd, he honestly guides to himself the hearts of his
fellow-men, or, as robber, he captures them by sur-
prise. This is true of the plastic arts as of music :
where the feeling of insufficient dialectic or a de-
ficiency in expression or narration, together with an
urgent, over-powerful impulse to form, gives birth
to that species of style known as " baroque." Only
the ill-educated and the arrogant will at once find a
depreciatory force in this word. The baroque style
always arises at the time of decay of a great art,
when the demands of art in classical expression
have become too great. It is a natural phenomenon
which will be observed with melancholy — for it is a
forerunner of the night — but at the same time with
admiration for its peculiar compensatory arts of ex-
pression and narration. To this style belongs already
a choice of material and subjects of the highest
dramatic tension, at which the heart trembles even
when there is no art, because heaven and hell are
all too near the emotions : then, the oratory of strong
passion and gestures, of ugly sublimity, of great

* In German Barockstil^ i.e. the degenerate post-Renais-
sance style in art and literature, which spread from Italy
in the seventeenth century. — Tr.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 75

masses, in fact of absolute quantity per se (as is
shown in Michael Angelo, the father or grandfather
of the Italian baroque stylists) : the lights of dusk,
illumination and conflagration playing upon those
strongly moulded forms: ever-new ventures in means
and aims, strongly underscored by artists for artists,
while the layman must fancy he sees an unconscious
overflowing of all the horns of plenty of an original
nature-art : all these characteristics that constitute
the greatness of that style are neither possible nor
permitted in the earlier ante-classical and classical
periods of a branch of art. Such luxuries hang long
on the tree like forbidden fruit. Just now, when
music is passing into this last phase, we may learn to
know the phenomenon of the baroque sty le in peculiar
splendour, and, by comparison, find much that is
instructive for earlier ages. For from Greek times
onward there has often been a baroque style, in
poetry, oratory, prose writing, sculpture, and, as is
well known, in architecture. This style, though
wanting in the highest nobility, — the nobility of an
innocent, unconscious, triumphant perfection, — has
nevertheless given pleasure to many of the best and
most serious minds of their time. Hence, as afore-
said, it is presumptuous to depreciate it without re-
serve, however happy we may feel because our taste
for it has not made us insensible to the purer and
greater style.

145-

The Value of Honest Books. — Honest books
make the reader honest, at least by exciting his
hatred and aversion, which otherwise cunning clever-



76 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ness knows so well how to conceal. Against a book,
however, we let ourselves go, however restrained we
may be in our relations with men.

146.
How Art makes Partisans.— -Individual fine
passages, an exciting general tenor, a moving and
absorbing finale — so much of a work of art is ac-
cessible even to most laymen. In an art period
when it is desired to win over the great majority of
the laymen to the side of the artists and to make a
party perhaps for the very preservation of art, the
creative artist will do well to offer nothing more than
the above. Then he will not be a squanderer of his
strength, in spheres where no one is grateful to him.
For to perform the remaining functions, the imi-
tation of Nature in her organic development and
growth, would in that case be like sowing seeds in
water.

147.

Becoming Great to the Detriment of
History. — Every later master who leads the taste
of art-lovers into his channel unconsciously gives rise
to a selection and revaluation of the older masters
and their works. Whatever in them is conformable
and akin to him, and anticipates and foreshadows
him, appears henceforth as the only important ele-
ment in them and their works — a fruit in which a
great error usually lies hidden like a worm.

148.
How an Epoch becomes Lured to Art.— If
we teach people by all the enchantments of artists



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 77

and thinkers to feel reverence for their defects, their
intellectual poverty, their absurd infatuations and
passions (as it is quite possible to do) ; if we show
them only the lofty side of crime and folly, only
the touching and appealing element in weakness and
flabbiness and blind devotion (that too has often
enough been done) : — we have employed the means
for inspiring even an unphilosophical and inartistic
age with an ecstatic love of philosophy and art
(especially of thinkers and artists as personalities)
and, in the worst case, perhaps with the only means
of defending the existence of such tender and fragile
beings.

149.

Criticism and Joy. — Criticism, one-sided and
unjust as well as intelligent criticism, gives so much
pleasure to him who exercises it that the world is
indebted to every work and every action that in-
spires much criticism and many critics. For criti-
cism draws after it a glittering train of joyousness,
wit, self-admiration, pride, instruction, designs of im-
provement. — The God of joy created the bad and
the mediocre for the same reason that he created the
good.

150.

Beyond his Limits.— When an artist wants to
be more than an artist — for example, the moral
awakener of his people — he at last falls in love, as a
punishment, with a monster of moral substance.
The Muse laughs, for, though a kind-hearted God-
dess, she can also be malignant from jealousy.
Milton and Klopstock are cases in point.



78 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

151.

A Glass Eye. — The tendency of a talent towards
moral subjects, characters, motives, towards the
" beautiful soul " of the work of art, is often only a
glass eye put on by the artist who lacks a beautiful
soul. It may result, though rarely, that his eye
finally becomes living Nature, if indeed it be Nature
with a somewhat troubled look. But the ordinary
result is that the whole world thinks it sees Nature
where there is only cold glass.

152.

Writing and Desire for Victory. — Writing
should always indicate a victory, indeed a conquest
of oneself which must be communicated to others
for their behoof. There are, however, dyspeptic
authors who only write when they cannot digest
something, or when something has remained stuck
in their teeth. Through their anger they try un-
consciously to disgust the reader too, and to exercise
violence upon him — that is, they desire victory, but
victory over others.

153.
A Good Book Needs Time. — Every good book
tastes bitter when it first comes out, for it has the
defect of newness. Moreover, it suffers damage
from its living author, if he is well known and much
talked about. For all the world is accustomed to
confuse the author with his work. Whatever of
profundity, sweetness, and brilliance the work may
contain must be developed as the years go by,






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 79

under the care of growing, then old, and lastly
traditional reverence. Many hours must pass, many
a spider must have woven its web about the book.
A book is made better by good readers and clearer
by good opponents.

154.

Extravagance as an Artistic Means. —
Artists well understand the idea of using extrava-
gance as an artistic means in order to convey an
impression of wealth. This is one of those innocent
wiles of soul-seduction that the artist must know,
for in his world, which has only appearance in view,
the means to appearance need not necessarily be
genuine.

155-

The Hidden Barrel -Organ. —Genius, by
virtue of its more ample drapery, knows better than
talent how to hide its barrel-organ. Yet after all
it too can only play its seven old pieces over and
over again.

156.

The Name on the Title-Page. — It is now a
matter of custom and almost of duty for the
author's name to appear on the book, and this is a
main cause of the fact that books have so little
influence. If they are good, they are worth more
than the personalities of their authors, of which
they are the quintessences. But as soon as the
author makes himself known on the title-page, the
quintessence, from the reader's point of view, be-



80 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






comes diluted with the personal, the most personal
element, and the aim of the book is frustrated. It
is the ambition of the intellect no longer to appear
individual.

157-
The Most Cutting Criticism.— We make the
most cutting criticism of a man or a book when we
indicate his or its ideal.

158.

Little or no Love. — Every good book is written
for a particular reader and men of his stamp, and
for that very reason is looked upon unfavourably
by all other readers, by the vast majority. Its re-
putation accordingly rests on a narrow basis and
must be built up by degrees. — The mediocre and
bad book is mediocre and bad because it seeks to
please, and does please, a great number.

159.

Music and Disease. — The danger of the new
music lies in the fact that it puts the cup of rapture
and exaltation to the lips so invitingly, and with
such a show of moral ecstasy, that even the noble
and temperate man always drinks a drop too much.
This minimum of intemperance, constantlyrepeated,
can in the end bring about a deeper convulsion and
destruction of mental health than any coarse excess
could do. Hence nothing remains but some day
to fly from the grotto of the nymph, and through
perils and billowy seas to forge one's way to the



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 8 1

smoke of Ithaca and the embraces of a simpler and
more human spouse.

1 60.

Advantage for Opponents. — A book full of
intellect communicates something thereof even to
its opponents.

161.

Youth and Criticism. — To criticise a book
means, for the young, not to let oneself be touched
by a single productive thought therefrom, and to
protect one's skin with hands and feet. The
youngster lives in opposition to all novelty that
he cannot love in the lump, in a position of self-
defence, and in this connection he commits, as often
as he can, a superfluous sin.

162.

Effect of Quantity. — The greatest paradox
in the history of poetic art lies in this : that in all
that constitutes the greatness of the old poets a
man may be a barbarian, faulty and deformed from
top to toe, and still remain the greatest of poets.
This is the case with Shakespeare, who, as com-
pared with Sophocles, is like a mine of immeasur-
able wealth in gold, lead, and rubble, whereas
Sophocles is not merely gold, but gold in its noblest
form, one that almost makes us forget the money-
value of the metal. But quantity in its highest in-
tensity has the same effect as quality. That is a
good thing for Shakespeare.



82 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






I6 3 .

All Beginning is Dangerous.— The Poet can
choose whether to raise emotion from one grade to
another, and so finally to exalt it to a great height
— or to try a surprise attack, and from the start
to pull the bell-rope with might and main. Both
processes have their danger — in the first case his
hearer may run away from him through boredom,
in the second through terror.

164.

In Favour of Critics. — Insects sting, not from
malice, but because they too want to live. It is the
same with our critics — they desire our blood, not our
pain.

165.

Success of Aphorisms. — The inexperienced,
when an aphorism at once illuminates their minds
with its naked truth, always think that it is old and
well known. They look askance at the author, as if
he had wanted to steal the common property of all,
whereas they enjoy highly spiced half-truths, and
give the author to understand as much. He knows
how to appreciate the hint, and easily guesses there-
by where he has succeeded and failed.

166.

The Desire for Victory. — An artist who
exceeds the limit of his strength in all that he
undertakes will end by carrying the multitude
along with him through the spectacle of violent






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 83

wrestling that he affords. Success is not always
the accompaniment only of victory, but also of the
desire for victory.

167.

Sibi S crib ere. — The sensible author writes for
no other posterity than his own — that is, for his
age — so as to be able even then to take pleasure
in himself.

168.

Praise of the Aphorism. — A good aphorism
is too hard for the tooth of time, and is not worn
away by all the centuries, although it serves as food
for every epoch. Hence it is the greatest paradox
in literature, the imperishable in the midst of
change, the nourishment which always remains
highly valued, as salt does, and never becomes
stupid like salt.

169.

The Art-Need of the Second Order. — The
people may have something of what can be called
art-need, but it is small, and can be cheaply satis-
fied. On the whole, the remnant of art (it must
be honestly confessed) suffices for this need. Let
us consider, for example, the kind of melodies and
songs in which the most vigorous, unspoiled, and
true-hearted classes of the population find genuine
delight; let us live among shepherds, cowherds,
peasants, huntsmen, soldiers, and sailors, and give
ourselves the answer. And in the country town, just
in the houses that are the homes of inherited civic
virtue, is it not the worst music at present produced



84 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that is loved and, one might say,cherished ? He who
speaks of deeper needs and unsatisfied yearnings
for art among the people, as it is, is a crank or an im-
postor. Be honest ! Only in exceptional men is there
now an art-need in the highest sense — because art
is once more on the down-grade, and human powers
and hopes are for the time being directed to other
matters. — Apart from this, outside the populace,
there exists indeed, in the higher and highest strata
of society, a broader and more comprehensive art-
need, but of the second order. Here there is a sort
of artistic commune, which possibly means to be
sincere. But let us look at the elements ! They
are in general the more refined malcontents, who
attain no genuine pleasure in themselves ; the cul-
tured, who have not become free enough to dispense
with the consolations of religion, and yet do not
find its incense sufficiently fragrant ; the half-aristo-
cratic, who are too weak to combat by a heroic
conversion or renunciation the one fundamental
error of their lives or the pernicious bent of their
characters ; the highly gifted, who think themselves
too dignified to be of service by modest activity,
and are too lazy for real, self-sacrificing work ; girls
who cannot create for themselves a satisfactory
sphere of duties ; women who have tied themselves
by a light-hearted or nefarious marriage, and know
that they are not tied securely enough; scholars,
physicians, merchants, officials who specialised too
early and never gave their lives a free enough scope
— who do their work efficiently, it is true, but with a
worm gnawing at their hearts ; finally, all imperfect
artists — these are nowadays the true needers of art !



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 85

What do they really desire from art ? Art is to drive
away hours and moments of discomfort, boredom,
half-bad conscience, and, if possible, transform the
faults of their lives and characters into faults of
world-destiny. Very different were the Greeks, who
realised in their art the outflow and overflow of their
own sense of well-being and health, and loved to
see their perfection once more from a standpoint
outside themselves. They were led to art by delight
in themselves ; our contemporaries — by disgust of
themselves.

170.

The Germans in the Theatre.— The real
theatrical talent of the Germans was Kotzebue. He
and his Germans, those of higher as well as those
of middle-class society, were necessarily associated,
and his contemporaries should have said of him in all
seriousness, " in him we live and move and have our
being." Here was nothing — no constraint, pretence,
or half-enjoyment : what he could and would do was
understood. Yes, until now the honest theatrical
success on the German stage has been in the hands
of the shamefaced or unashamed heirs of Kotzebue's
methods and influence — that is, as far as comedy
still flourishes at all. The result is that much of the
Germanism of that age, sometimes far off from the
great towns, still survives. Good-natured ; incon-
tinent in small pleasures ; always ready for tears ;
with the desire, in the theatre at any rate, to be
able to get rid of their innate sobriety and strict
attention to duty and exercise; a smiling, nay, a
laughing indulgence ; confusing goodness and sym-



S6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

pathy and welding them into one, as is the essential
characteristic of German sentimentality; exceed-
ingly happy at a noble, magnanimous action ; for
the rest, submissive towards superiors, envious of
each other, and yet in their heart of hearts thor-
oughly self-satisfied — such were they and such was
he. — The second dramatic talent was Schiller. He
discovered a class of hearers which had hitherto
never been taken into consideration : among the
callow German youth of both sexes. His poetry
responded to their higher, nobler, more violent if
more confused emotions, their delight in the jingle
of moral words (a delight that begins to disappear
when we reach the thirties). Thus he won for him-
self, by virtue of the passionateness and partisanship
of the young, a success which gradually reacted with
advantage upon those of riper years. Generally
speaking, Schiller rejuvenated the Germans. Goethe
stood and still stands above the Germans in every
respect. To them he will never belong. How could
a nation in well-being and well-wishing come up to
the intellectuality of Goethe ? Beethoven composed
and Schopenhauer philosophised above the heads
of the Germans, and it was above their heads, in
the same way, that Goethe wrote his Tasso, his
Iphigenie. He was followed by a small company
of highly cultured persons, who were educated by
antiquity, life, and travel, and had grown out of
German ways of thought. He himself did not
wish it to be otherwise. — When the Romantics set
up their well -conceived Goethe cult; when their
amazing skill in appreciation was passed on to the
disciples of Hegel, the real educators of the Germans



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 87

of this century ; when the awakening national am-
bition turned out advantageous to the fame of the
German poets ; when the real standard of the nation,
as to whether it could honestly find enjoyment in
anything, became inexorably subordinated to the
judgment of individuals and to that national am-
bition, — that is, when people began to enjoy by
compulsion, — then arose that false, spurious German
culture which was ashamed of Kotzebue ; which
brought Sophocles, Calderon, and even the Second
Part of Goethe's Faust on the stage ; and which,
on account of its foul tongue and congested stomach,
no longer knows now what it likes and what it finds
tedious. — Happy are those who have taste, even if
it be a bad taste ! Only by this characteristic can
one be wise as well as happy. Hence the Greeks,
who were very refined in such matters, designated
the sage by a word that means "man of taste," and
called wisdom, artistic as well as scientific, " taste "
[sophia).

171.

Music as a Late-Comer in every Culture.
— Among all the arts that are accustomed to grow
on a definite culture-soil and under definite social
and political conditions, music is the last plant to
come up, arising in the autumn and fading-season
of the culture to which it belongs. At the same
time, the first signs and harbingers of a new spring
are usually already noticeable, and sometimes music,
like the language of a forgotten age, rings out into
a new, astonished world, and comes too late. In the
art of the Dutch and Flemish musicians the soul



88 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

of the Christian middle ages at last found its fullest
tone: their sound-architecture is the posthumous
but legitimate and equal sister of Gothic. Not until
Handel's music was heard the note of the best in
the soul of Luther and his kin, the great Judaeo-
heroical impulse that created the whole Reforma-
tion movement. Mozart first expressed in golden
melody the age of Louis XIV. and the art of Racine
and Claude Lorrain. The eighteenth century — that
century of rhapsody, of broken ideals and transitory
happiness — only sang itself out in the music of Bee-
thoven and Rossini. A lover of sentimental similes
might say that all really important music was a
swan-song. — Music is, in fact, not a universal language
for all time, as is so often said in its praise, but re-
sponds exactly to a particular period and warmth
of emotion which involves a quite definite, individual
culture, determined by time and place, as its inner
law. The music of Palestrina would be quite un-
intelligible to a Greek ; and again, what would the
music of Rossini convey to Palestrina ? — It may be
that our most modern German music, with all its pre-
eminence and desire of pre-eminence, will soon be
no longer understood. For this music sprang from
a culture that is undergoing a rapid decay, from the
soil of that epoch of reaction and restoration in
which a certain Catholicism of feeling, as well as a
delight in all indigenous, national, primitive man-
ners, burst into bloom and scattered a blended per-
fume over Europe. These two emotional tendencies,
adopted in their greatest strength and carried to
their farthest limits, found final expression in the
music of Wagner. Wagner's predilection for the old



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 89

native sagas, his free idealisation of their unfamiliar
gods and heroes, — who are really sovereign beasts
of prey with occasional fits of thoughtfulness, mag-
nanimity, and boredom, — his re-animation of those
figures, to which he gave in addition the mediaeval
Christian thirst for ecstatic sensuality and spiritual-
isation — all this Wagnerian give-and-take with re-
gard to materials, souls, figures, and words — would
clearly express the spirit of his music, if it could not,
like all music, speak quite unambiguously of itself.
This spirit wages the last campaign of reaction
against the spirit of illumination which passed into
this century from the last, and also against the super-
national ideas of French revolutionary romanticism
and of English and American insipidity in the
reconstruction of state and society. — But is it not
evident that the spheres of thought and emotion
apparently suppressed by Wagner and his school
have long since acquired fresh strength, and that
his late musical protest against them generally rings
into ears that prefer to hear different and opposite
notes ; so that one day that high and wonderful
art will suddenly become unintelligible and will be
covered by the spider's web of oblivion ? — In con-
sidering this state of affairs we must not let our-
selves be led astray by those transitory fluctuations
which arise like a reaction within a reaction, as a
temporary sinking of the mountainous wave in the
midst of the general upheaval. Thus, this decade of
national war, ultramontane martyrdom, and social-
istic unrest may, in its remoter after-effect, even aid
the Wagnerian art to acquire a sudden halo, with-
out guaranteeing that it " has a future " or that it



po



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






has the future. It is in the very nature of music
that the fruits of its great culture-vintage should
lose their taste and wither earlier than the fruits of
the plastic arts or those that grow on the tree of
knowledge. Among all the products of the human
artistic sense ideas are the most solid and lasting.

172.

The Poet no longer a Teacher.— Strange
as it may sound to our time, there were once poets
and artists whose soul was above the passions with
their delights and convulsions, and who therefore
took their pleasure in purer materials, worthier men,
more delicate complications and denouements. If
the artists of our day for the most part unfetter the
will, and so are under certain circumstances for that
very reason emancipators of life, those were tamers of
the will, enchanters of animals, creators of men. In
fact, they moulded, re-moulded, and new-moulded
life, whereas the fame of poets of our day lies in
unharnessing, unchaining, and shattering. — The an-
cient Greeks demanded of the poet that he should
be the teacher of grown men. How ashamed the
poet would be now if this demand were made of
him ! He is not even a good student of himself,
and so never himself becomes a good poem or a fine
picture. Under the most favourable circumstances
he remains the shy, attractive ruin of a temple, but
at the same time a cavern of cravings, overgrown
like a ruin with flowers, nettles, and poisonous weeds,
inhabited and haunted by snakes, worms, spiders,
and birds ; an object for sad reflection as to why the
noblest and most precious must grow up at once



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 91

like a ruin, without the past and future of perfec-
tion.

173.
Looking Forward and Backward. — An art
like that which streams out of Homer, Sophocles,
Theocritus, Calderon, Racine, Goethe, as the super-
abundance of a wise and harmonious conduct of life
— that is the true art, at which we grasp when we
have ourselves become wiser and more harmonious.
It is not that barbaric, if ever so delightful, outpour-
ing of hot and highly coloured things from an un-
disciplined, chaotic soul, which is what we under-
stood by " art " in our youth. It is obvious from
the nature of the case that for certain periods of
life an art of overstrain, excitement, antipathy to
the orderly, monotonous, simple, logical, is an in-
evitable need, to which artists must respond, lest
the soul of such periods should unburden itself in
other ways, through all kinds of disorder and im-
propriety. Hence youths as they generally are, full,
fermenting, tortured above all things by boredom,
and women who lack work that fully occupies their
soul, require that art of delightful disorder. All
the more violently on that account are they in-
flamed with a desire for satisfaction without change,
happiness without stupor and intoxication.

174.

Against the Art of Works of Art.— Art is
above all and first of all meant to embellish life, to
make us ourselves endurable and if possible agree-
able in the eyes of others. With this task in view,



92 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

art moderates us and holds us in restraint, creates
forms of intercourse, binds over the uneducated to
laws of decency, cleanliness, politeness, well-timed
speech and silence. Hence art must conceal or
transfigure everything that is ugly — the painful,
terrible, and disgusting elements which in spite of
every effort will always break out afresh in accord-
ance with the very origin of human nature. Art
has to perform this duty especially in regard to the
passions and spiritual agonies and anxieties, and to
cause the significant factor to shine through unavoid-
able or unconquerable ugliness. To this great, super-
great task the so-called art proper, that of works of
art, is a mere accessary. A man who feels within
himself a surplus of such powers of embellishment,
concealment, and transfiguration will finally seek
to unburden himself of this surplus in works of art.
The same holds good, under special circumstances,
of a whole nation. — But as a rule we nowadays begin
art at the end, hang on to its tail, and think that
works of art constitute art proper, and that life
should be improved and transformed by this means
— fools that we are! If we begin a dinner with
dessert, and try sweet after sweet, small wonder that
we ruin our digestions and even our appetites for
the good, hearty, nourishing meal to which art in-
vites us !

175-

Continued Existence of Art. — Why, really,
does a creative art nowadays continue to exist ? Be-
cause the majority who have hours of leisure (and
such an art is for them only) think that they cannot



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 93

fill up their time without music, theatres and picture-
galleries, novels and poetry. Granted that one
could keep them from this indulgence, either they
would strive less eagerly for leisure, and the in-
vidious sight of the rich would be less common (a
great gain for the stability of society), or they would
have leisure, but would learn to reflect on what can
be learnt and unlearnt : on their work, for instance,
their associations, the pleasure they could bestow.
All the world, with the exception of the artist, would
in both cases reap the advantage. — Certainly, there
are many vigorous, sensible readers who could take
objection to this. Still, it must be said on behalf of
the coarse and malignant that the author himself is
concerned with this protest, and that there is in his
book much to be read that is not actually written
down therein.

176.

The Mouthpiece of the Gods. — The poet
expresses the universal higher opinions of the
nation, he is its mouthpiece and flute ; but by
virtue of metre and all other artistic means he so
expresses them that the nation regards them as
something quite new and wonderful, and believes
in all seriousness that he is the mouthpiece of the
Gods. Yes, under the clouds of creation the poet
himself forgets whence he derives all his intellectual
wisdom — from father and mother, from teachers and
books of all kinds, from the street and particularly
from the priest. He is deceived by his own art,
and really believes, in a naive period, that a God
is speaking through him, that he is creating in a



94 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






state of religious inspiration. As a matter of fact,
he is only saying what he has learnt, a medley of
popular wisdom and popular foolishness. Hence,
so far as a poet is really vox populi he is held to be
vox dei.

w>

What all Art wants to Do and Cannot. —
The last and hardest task of the artist is the pre-
sentment of what remains the same, reposes in
itself, is lofty and simple and free from the bizarre.
Hence the noblest forms of moral perfection are
rejected as inartistic by weaker artists, because the
sight of these fruits is too painful for their ambition.
The fruit gleams at them from the topmost branches
of art, but they lack the ladder, the courage, the
grip to venture so high. In himself a Phidias is
quite possible as a poet, but, if modern strength be
taken into consideration, almost solely in the sense
that to God nothing is impossible. The desire for
a poetical Claude Lorrain is already an immodesty
at present, however earnestly one man's heart may
yearn for such a consummation. — The presentment
of the highest man, the most simple and at the same
time the most complete, has hitherto been beyond
the scope of all artists. Perhaps, however, the
Greeks, in the ideal of Athene, saw farther than
any men did before or after their time.

178.

Art and Restoration. — The retrograde move-
ments in history, the so-called periods of restora-
tion, which try to revive intellectual and social



J



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 9$

conditions that existed before those immediately
preceding, — and seem really to succeed in giving
them a brief resurrection, — have the charm of
sentimental recollection, ardent longing for what is
almost lost, hasty embracing of a transitory happi-
ness. It is on account of this strange trend towards
seriousness that in such transient and almost dreamy
periods art and poetry find a natural soil, just as the
tenderest and rarest plants grow on mountain-slopes
of steep declivity. — Thus many a good artist is un-
wittingly impelled to a "restoration" way of thinking
in politics and society, for which, on his own account,
he prepares a quiet little corner and garden. Here
he collects about himself the human remains of the
historical epoch that appeals to him, and plays his lyre
to many who are dead, half-dead, and weary to death,
perhaps with the above-mentioned result of a brief
resurrection.

179.
Happiness of the Age. — In two respects our
age is to be accounted happy. With respect to the
past, we enjoy all cultures and their productions, and
nurture ourselves on the noblest blood of all periods.
We stand sufficiently near to the magic of the
forces from whose womb these periods are born to
be able in passing to submit to their spell with
pleasure and terror ; whereas earlier cultures could
only enjoy themselves, and never looked beyond
themselves, but were rather overarched by a bell of
broader or narrower dome, through which indeed
light streamed down to them, but which their gaze
could not pierce. With respect to the future,



96 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






there opens out to us for the first time a mighty,
comprehensive vista of human and economic pur-
poses engirdling the whole inhabited globe. At
the same time, we feel conscious of a power our-
selves to take this new task in hand without presump-
tion, without requiring supernatural aids. Yes,
whatever the result of our enterprise, however much
we may have overestimated our strength, at any
rate we need render account to no one but our-
selves, and mankind can henceforth begin to do
with itself what it will. — There are, it is true,
peculiar human bees, who only know how to suck
the bitterest and worst elements from the chalice
of every flower. It is true that all flowers contain
something that is not honey, but these bees may
be allowed to feel in their own way about the
happiness of our time, and continue to build up
their hive of discomfort.

1 80.

A Vision. — Hours of instruction and meditation
for adults, even the most mature, and such institu-
tions visited without compulsion but in accordance
with the moral injunction of the whole community ;
the churches as the meeting-places most worthy and
rich in memories for the purpose ; at the same time
daily festivals in honour of the reason that is at-
tained and attainable by man ; a newer and fuller
budding and blooming of the ideal of the teacher,
in which the clergyman, the artist and the physician,
the man of science and the sage are blended, and
their individual virtues should come to the fore as



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 97

a collective virtue in their teaching itself, in their
discourses, in their method — this is my ever-re-
curring vision, of which I firmly believe that it has
raised a corner of the veil of the future.



181.

Education a Distortion. — The extraordinary
haphazardness of the whole system of education,
which leads every adult to say nowadays that his sole
educator was chance, and the weathercock-nature
of educational methods and aims, may be explained
as follows. The oldest and the newest culture-
powers, as in a turbulent mass-meeting, would rather
be heard than understood, and wish to prove at all
costs by their outcries and clamourings that they
still exist or already exist. The poor teachers and
educators are first dazed by this senseless noise,
then become silent and finally apathetic, allowing
anything to be done to them just as they in their
turn allow anything to be done to their pupils.
They are not trained themselves, so how are they
to train others ? They are themselves no straight-
growing, vigorous, succulent trees, and he who
wishes Xo attach himself to them must wind and
bend himself and finally become distorted and de-
formed as they.

182.

Philosophers and Artists of the Age. —
Rhapsody and frigidity, burning desires and wan-
ing of the heart's glow — this wretched medley is to
be found in the picture of the highest European
society of the present day. There the artist thinks
vol. 11. G



98 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






that he is achieving a great deal when through his
art he lights the torch of the heart as well as the
torch of desire. The philosopher has the same
notion, when in the chilliness of his heart, which he
has in common with his age, he cools hot desires in
himself and his following by his world-denying judg-
ments.

183.

Not to be a Soldier of Culture without
Necessity. — At last people are learning what it
costs us so dear not to know in our youth — that
we must first do superior actions and secondly
seek the superior wherever and under whatever
names it is to be found ; that we must at once go out
of the way of all badness and mediocrity without
fighting it ; and that even doubt as to the excellence
of a thing (such as quickly arises in one of practised
taste) should rank as an argument against it and a
reason for completely avoiding it. We must not
shrink from the danger of occasionally making a
mistake and confounding the less accessible good
with the bad and imperfect. Only he who can do
nothing better should attack the world's evils as
the soldier of culture. But those who should support
culture and spread its teachings ruin themselves
if they go about armed, and by precautions, night-
watches, and bad dreams turn the peace of their
domestic and artistic life into sinister unrest.

184.

How Natural History should be Ex-
pounded. — Natural history, like the history of the



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 99

war and victory of moral and intellectual forces
in the campaign against anxiety, self-delusion, lazi-
ness, superstition, folly, should be so expounded
that every reader or listener may be continually
aroused to strive after mental and physical health
and soundness, after the feeling of joy, and be
awakened to the desire to be the heir and continu-
ator of mankind, to an ever nobler adventurous im-
pulse. Hitherto natural history has not found its
true language, because the inventive and eloquent
artists — who are needed for this purpose — never
rid themselves of a secret mistrust of it, and above
all never wish to learn from it a thorough lesson.
Nevertheless it must be conceded to the English
that their scientific manuals for the lower strata
of the people have made admirable strides towards
that ideal. But then such books are written by
their foremost men of learning, full, complete, and
inspiring natures, and not, as among us, by mediocre
investigators.

185.
Genius in Humanity. — If genius, according to
Schopenhauer's observation, lies in the coherent
and vivid recollection of our own experience, a
striving towards genius in humanity collectively
might be deduced from the striving towards know-
ledge of the whole historic past — which is begin-
ning to mark off the modern age more and more
as compared with earlier ages and has for the first
time broken down the barriers between nature and
spirit, men and animals, morality and physics. A
perfectly conceived history would be cosmic self-
consciousness.



IOO



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



1 86.



The Cult of Culture. — On great minds is
bestowed the terrifying all-too-human of their
natures, their blindnesses, deformities, and extra-
vagances, so that their more powerful, easily all-
too-powerful influence may be continually held
within bounds through the distrust aroused by such
qualities. For the sum-total of all that human-
ity needs for its continued existence is so com-
prehensive, and demands powers so diverse and so
numerous, that for every one-sided predilection,
whether in science or politics or art or commerce, to
which such natures would persuade us, mankind as
a whole has to pay a heavy price. It has always
been a great disaster to culture when human beings
are worshipped. In this sense we may understand
the precept of Mosaic law which forbids us to have
any other gods but God. — Side by side with the
cult of genius and violence we must always place,
as its complement and remedy, the cult of culture.
This cult can find an intelligent appreciation
even for the material, the inferior, the mean, the
misunderstood, the weak, the imperfect, the one-
sided, the incomplete, the untrue, the apparent, even
the wicked and horrible, and can grant them the
concession that all this is necessary. For the
continued harmony of all things human, attained
by amazing toil and strokes of luck, and just as
much the work of Cyclopes and ants as of geniuses,
shall never be lost. How, indeed, could we dis-
pense with that deep, universal, and often uncanny



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. IOI

bass, without which, after all, melody cannot be
melody ?

187.

The Antique World and Pleasure. — The
man of the antique world understood better how to
rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less.
They continually found new motives for feeling
happy, for celebrating festivals, being inventive with
all their wealth of shrewdness and reflection. We,
on the other hand, concentrate our intellect rather
on the solving of problems which have in view
painlessness and the removal of sources of dis-
comfort. With regard to suffering existence, the
ancients sought to forget or in some way to convert
the sensation into a pleasant one, thus trying to
supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering,
and on the whole prefer to use prophylactics. —
Perhaps we are only building upon a foundation
whereon a later age will once more set up the temple
of joy.

188.

The Muses as Liars. — " We know how to tell
many lies," so sang the Muses once, when they
revealed themselves to Hesiod. — The conception of
the artist as deceiver, once grasped, leads to im-
portant discoveries.

189.

How Paradoxical Homer can be. — Is there
anything more desperate, more horrible, more in-
credible, shining over human destiny like a winter
sun, than that idea of Homer's :



102 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

" So the decree of the Gods willed it, and doomed
man to perish, that it might be a matter for song
even to distant generations " ?

In other words, we suffer and perish so that poets
may not lack material, and this is the dispensation
of those very Gods of Homer who seem much con-
cerned about the joyousness of generations to come,
but very little about us men of the present. To
think that such ideas should ever have entered the
head of a Greek !

190.

Supplementary Justification of Exist-
ence. — Many ideas have come into the world as
errors and fancies but have turned out truths, be-
cause men have afterwards given them a genuine
basis to rest upon.

191.

Pro and Con Necessary. — He who has not
realised that every great man must not only be en-
couraged but also, for the sake of the common
welfare, opposed, is certainly still a great child — or
himself a great man.

192.

Injustice of Genius. — Genius is most unjust
towards geniuses, if they be contemporary. Either
it thinks it has no need of them and considers them
superfluous (for it can do without them), or their
influence crosses the path of its electric current, in
which case it even calls them pernicious.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 103
193.

The Saddest Destiny of a Prophet. — He
has worked twenty years to convince his con-
temporaries, and succeeds at last, but in the mean-
time his adversaries have also succeeded — he is no
longer convinced of himself.



194.

Three Thinkers like one Spider.— In every
philosophical school three thinkers follow one an-
other in this relation: the first produces from
himself sap and seed, the second draws it out in
threads and spins a cunning web, the third waits in
this web for the victims who are caught in it — and
tries to live upon this philosophy.



195.

From Association with Authors. — It is as
bad a habit to go about with an author grasping
him by the nose as grasping him by the horn (and
every author has his horn).

196.

A Team of Two. — Vagueness of thought and
outbursts of sentimentality are as often wedded to
the reckless desire to have one's own way by hook
or by crook, to make oneself alone of any conse-
quence, as a genuinely helpful, gracious, and kindly
spirit is wedded to the impulse towards clearness



104 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and purity of thought and towards emotional mod-
eration and self-restraint.



197.

Binding and Separating Forces. — Surely it
is in the heads of men that there arises the force
that binds them — an understanding of their common
interest or the reverse ; and in their hearts the force
that separates them — a blind choosing and groping
in love and hate, a devotion to one at the expense
of all, and a consequent contempt for the common
utility.

198.

Marksmen and Thinkers. — There are curious
marksmen who miss their mark, but leave the
shooting-gallery with secret pride in the fact that
their bullet at any rate flew very far (beyond the
mark, it is true), or that it did not hit the mark but
hit something else. There are thinkers of the same
stamp.

199.

Attack from Two Sides.— We act as enemies
towards an intellectual tendency or movement when
we are superior to it and disapprove of its aim, or
when its aim is too high and unrecognisable to our
eye — in other words, when it is superior to us. So
the same party may be attacked from two sides,
from above and from below. Not infrequently the
assailants, from common hatred, form an alliance
which is more repulsive than all that they hate.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 105
200.

ORIGINAL. — Original minds are distinguished not
by being the first to see a new thing, but by seeing
the old, well-known thing, which is seen and over-
looked by every one, as something new. The first
discoverer is usually that quite ordinary and un-
intellectual visionary — chance.

201.
Error of Philosophers. — The philosopher
believes that the value of his philosophy lies in the
whole, in the structure. Posterity finds it in the
stone with which he built and with which, from that
time forth, men will build oftener and better — in
other words, in the fact that the structure may be
destroyed and yet have value as material.

202.
Wit. — Wit is the epitaph of an emotion.

203.

The Moment before Solution. — In science it
occurs every day and every hour that a man, im-
mediately before the solution, remains stuck, being
convinced that his efforts have been entirely in vain
— like one who, in untying a noose, hesitates at the
moment when it is nearest to coming loose, because
at that very moment it looks most like a knot.

204.

Among the Visionaries. — The thoughtful
man, and he who is sure of his intelligence, may



106 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

profitably consort with visionaries for a decade and
abandon himself in their torrid zone to a moderate
insanity. He will thus have travelled a good part
of the road towards that cosmopolitanism of the in-
tellect which can say without presumption, " Noth-
ing intellectual is alien to me."



205.

Keen Air. — The best and healthiest element in
science as amid the mountains is the keen air that
plays about it. — Intellectual molly-coddles (such as
artists) dread and abuse science on account of this
atmosphere.

206.

Why Savants are Nobler than Artists.
— Science requires nobler natures than does poetry;
natures that are more simple, less ambitious, more
restrained, calmer, that think less of posthumous
fame and can bury themselves in studies which, in
the eye of the many, scarcely seem worthy of such
a sacrifice of personality. There is another loss of
which they are conscious. The nature of their occu-
pation, its continual exaction of the greatest sobriety,
weakens their will ; the fire is not kept up so vigor-
ously as on the hearths of poetic minds. As such,
they often lose their strength and prime earlier than
artists do — and, as has been said, they are aware of
their danger. Under all circumstances they seem
less gifted because they shine less, and thus they
will always be rated below their value.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 107
207.

How Far Piety Obscures. — In later centuries
the great man is credited with all the great qualities
and virtues of his century. Thus all that is best
is continually obscured by piety, which treats the
picture as a sacred one, to be surrounded with all
manner of votive offerings. In the end the picture
is completely veiled and covered by the offerings,
and thenceforth is more an object of faith than of
contemplation.

208.

Standing on One's Head. — If we make truth
stand on its head, we generally fail to notice that
our own head, too, is not in its right position.

209.

Origin and Utility of Fashion. — The obvi-
ous satisfaction of the individual with his own form
excites imitation and gradually creates the form of
the many — that is, fashion. The many desire, and
indeed attain, that same comforting satisfaction with
their own form. Consider how many reasons every
man has for anxiety and shy self-concealment, and
how, on this account, three-fourths of his energy
and goodwill is crippled and may become unpro-
ductive ! So we must be very grateful to fashion for
unfettering that three-fourths and communicating
self-confidence and the power of cheerful compro-
mise to those who feel themselves bound to each
other by its law. Even foolish laws give freedom



108 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and calm of the spirit, so long as many persons have
submitted to their sway.

210.

Looseners of Tongues. — The value of many
men and books rests solely on their faculty for com-
pelling all to speak out the most hidden and in-
timate things. They are looseners of tongues and
crowbars to open the most stubborn teeth. Many
events and misdeeds which are apparently only sent
as a curse to mankind possess this value and utility.

211.

Intellectual Freedom of Domicile.* — Who
of us could dare to call himself a " free spirit " if he
could not render homage after his fashion, by taking
on his own shoulders a portion of that burden of
public dislike and abuse, to men to whom this name
is attached as a reproach ? We might as well call
ourselves in all seriousness " spirits free of domicile "
{Freiziigig) (and without that arrogant or high-
spirited defiance) because we feel the impulse to
freedom {Zug zur Freiheit) as the strongest instinct
of our minds and, in contrast to fixed and limited
minds, practically see our ideal in an intellectual
nomadism — to use a rgodest and almost deprecia-
tory expression.

* The original word, Freiziigig^ means, in the modern Ger-
man Empire, possessing the free right of migration, without
pecuniary burdens or other restrictions, from one German
state to another. The play on words in Zug zur Freiheit
(" impulse to freedom ") is untranslateable. — Tr.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. IO9
212.

Yes, the Favour of the IvfusEs!— What
Homer says on this point goes right to our heart, so
true, so terrible is it :

" The Muse loved him with all her heart and gave
him good and evil, for she took away his eyes and
vouchsafed him sweet song."

This is an endless text for thinking men: she
gives good and evil, that is her manner of loving
with all her heart and soul ! And each man will
interpret specially for himself why we poets and
thinkers have to give up our eyes in her service.*

213.
Against the Cultivation of Music— The
artistic training of the eye from childhood upwards
by means of drawing, painting, landscape-sketching,
figures, scenes, involves an estimable gain in life,
making the eyesight keen, calm, and enduring in
the observation of men and circumstances. No
similar secondary advantage arises from the artistic
cultivation of the ear, whence public schools will
generally do well to give the art of the eye a pre-
ference over that of the ear.

214.
The Discoverers of Trivialities. — Subtle
minds, from which nothing is farther than trivialities,
often discover a triviality after taking all manner of

* Nietzsche seems to allude to his own case, for he ulti-
mately contracted a myopia which bordered on blindness.
— Tr.



IIO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

circuitous routes and mountain paths, and, to the
astonishment of the non-subtle, rejoice exceedingly.



215.

Morals of Savants.— -A regular and rapid
advance in the sciences is only possible when the
individual is compelled to be not so distrustful as
to test every calculation and assertion of others, in
fields which are remote from his own. A necessary
condition, however, is that every man should have
competitors in his own sphere, who are extremely
distrustful and keep a sharp eye upon him. From
this juxtaposition of " not too distrustful " and " ex-
tremely distrustful " arises sincerity in the republic
of learning.

216.

Reasons for Sterility. — There are highly
gifted minds which are always sterile only because,
from temperamental weakness, they are too impa-
tient to wait for their pregnancy.



217

The Perverted World of Tears. — The
manifold discomforts which the demands of higher
culture cause to man finally pervert his nature to
such an extent that he usually keeps himself stoical
and unbending. Thus he has tears in reserve only
for rare occasions of happiness, so that many must
weep even at the enjoyment of painlessness — only
when happy does his heart still beat.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. Ill
218.

The Greeks as Interpreters. — When we
speak of the Greeks we unwittingly speak of to-day
and yesterday ; their universally known history is
a blank mirror, always reflecting something that is
not in the mirror itself. We enjoy the freedom of
speaking about them in order to have the right
of being silent about others — so that these Greeks
themselves may whisper something in the ear of
the reflective reader. Thus the Greeks facilitate to
modern men the communication of much that is
debatable and hard to communicate.

219.

Of the Acquired Character oftheGreeks.
— We are easily led astray by the renowned Greek
clearness,transparency,simplicity,and order, by their
crystal-like naturalness and crystal-like art, into be-
lieving that all these gifts were bestowed on the
Greeks — for instance, that they could not but write
well, as Lichtenberg expressed it on one occasion.
Yet no statement could be more hasty and more
untenable. The history of prose from Gorgias to
Demosthenes shows a course of toiling and wrest-
ling towards light from the obscure, overloaded,
and tasteless, reminding one of the labour of heroes
who had to construct the first roads through forest
and bog. The dialogue of tragedy was the real
achievement of the dramatist, owing to its uncom-
mon clearness and precision, whereas the national
tendency was to riot in symbolism and innuendo,
a tendency expressly fostered by the great choral



112 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



lyric. Similarly it was the achievement of Homer
to liberate the Greeks from Asiatic pomp and
gloom, and to have attained the clearness of archi-
tecture in details great and small. Nor was it by any
means thought easy to say anything in a pure and
illuminating style. How else should we account for
the great admiration for the epigram of Simonides,
which shows itself so simple, with no gilded points
or arabesques of wit, but says all that it has to say
plainly and with the calm of the sun, not with the
straining after effect of the lightning. Since the
struggle towards light from an almost native twilight
is Greek, a thrill of jubilation runs through the people
when they hear a laconic sentence, the language of
elegy or the maxims of the Seven Wise Men. Hence
they were so fond of giving precepts in verse, a prac-
tice that we find objectionable. This was the true
Apolline task of the Hellenic spirit, with the aim
of rising superior to the perils of metre and the
obscurity which is otherwise characteristic of poetry.
Simplicity, flexibility, and sobriety were wrestled
for and not given by nature to this people. The
danger of a relapse into Asianism constantly hovered
over the Greeks, and really overtook them from time
to time like a murky, overflowing tide of mystical
impulses, primitive savagery and darkness. We
see them plunge in ; we see Europe, as it were,
flooded, washed away — for Europe was very small
then ; but they always emerge once more to the
light, good swimmers and divers that they are, those
fellow-countrymen of Odysseus.



i



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. II3
220.

The Pagan Characteristic. — Perhaps there
is nothing more astonishing to the observer of the
Greek world than to discover that the Greeks from
time to time held festivals, as it were, for all their
passions and evil tendencies alike, and in fact even
established a kind of series of festivals, by order of
the State, for their " all-too-human." This is the
pagan characteristic of their world, which Christianity-
has never understood and never can understand, and
has always combated and despised. — They accepted
this all-too-human as unavoidable, and preferred,
instead of railing at it, to give it a kind of secondary
right by grafting it on to the usages of society and
religion. All in man that has power they called
divine, and wrote it on the walls of their heaven.
They do not deny this natural instinct that expresses
itself in evil characteristics, but regulate and limit
it to definite cults and days, so as to turn those tur-
bulent streams into as harmless a course as possible,
after devising sufficient precautionary measures.
That is the root of all the moral broad-mindedness
of antiquity. To the wicked, the dubious, the back-
ward, the animal element, as to the barbaric, pre-
Hellenic and Asiatic, which still lived in the depths
of Greek nature, they allowed a moderate outflow,
and did not strive to destroy it utterly. The whole
system was under the domain of the State, which
was built up not on individuals or castes, but on
common human qualities. In the structure of the
State the Greeks show that wonderful sense for typi-
cal facts which later on enabled them to become in-
vestigators of Nature, historians, geographers, and
vol. 11. H



114 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






philosophers. It was not a limited moral law of
priests or castes, which had to decide about the
constitution of the State and State worship, but the
most comprehensive view of the reality of all that is
human. Whence do the Greeks derive this freedom,
this sense of reality ? Perhaps from Homer and the
poets who preceded him. For just those poets whose
nature is generally not the most wise or just possess,
in compensation, that delight in reality and activity
of every kind, and prefer not to deny even evil. It
suffices for them if evil moderates itself, does not
kill or inwardly poison everything — in other words,
they have similar ideas to those of the founders of
Greek constitutions, and were their teachers and
forerunners.

221.

Exceptional Greeks. — In Greece, deep, thor-
ough, serious minds were the exception. The na-
tional instinct tended rather to regard the serious
and thorough as a kind of grimace. To borrow
forms from a foreign source, not to create but to
transform into the fairest shapes — that is Greek.
To imitate, not for utility but for artistic illusion,
ever and anon to gain the mastery over forced
seriousness, to arrange, beautify, simplify — that is
the continual task from Homer to the Sophists of
the third and fourth centuries of our era, who are all
outward show, pompous speech, declamatory ges-
tures, and address themselves to shallow souls that
care only for appearance, sound, and effect. And
now let us estimate the greatness of those exceptional
Greeks, who created science ! Whoever tells of them ,
tells the most heroic story of the human mind !






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 115
222.

Simplicity not the First nor the Last
Thing in Point of Time. — In the history of
religious ideas many errors about development
and false gradations are made in matters which
in reality are not consecutive outgrowths but con-
temporary yet separate phenomena. In particular,
simplicity has still far too much the reputation of
being the- oldest, the initial thing. Much that is
human arises by subtraction and division, and not
merely by doubling, addition, and unification. — For
instance, men still believe in a gradual development
of the idea of God from those unwieldy stones and
blocks of wood up to the highest forms of anthropo-
morphism. Yet the fact is that so long as divinity
was attributed to and felt in trees, logs of wood,
stones, and beasts, people shrank from humanising
their forms as from an act of godlessness. First
of all, poets, apart from all considerations of cult
and the ban of religious shame, have had to make
the inner imagination of man accustomed and com-
pliant to this notion. Wherever more pious periods
and phases of thought gained the upper hand, this
liberating influence of poets fell into the back-
ground, and sanctity remained, after as before, on
the side of the monstrous, uncanny, quite peculiarly
inhuman. And then, much of what the inner im-
agination ventures to picture to itself would exert a
painful influence if externally and corporeally re-
presented. The inner eye is far bolder and more
shameless than the outer (whence the well-known
difficulty and, to some extent, impossibility, of



Il6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

working epic material into dramatic form). The
religious imagination for a long time entirely refuses
to believe in the identity of God with an image :
the image is meant to fix the numen of the Deity,
actually and specifically, although in a mysterious
and not altogether intelligible way. The oldest
image of the Gods is meant to shelter and at the
same time to hide* the God — to indicate him but not
to expose him to view. No Greek really looked upon
his Apollo as a pointed pillar of wood, his Eros as
a lump of stone. These were symbols, which were
intended to inspire dread of the manifestation of the
God. It was the same with those blocks of wood
out of which individual limbs, generally in excessive
number, were fashioned with the scantiest of carv-
ing — as, for instance, a Laconian Apollo with four
hands and four ears. In the incomplete, symbolical,
or excessive lies a terrible sanctity, which is meant
to prevent us from thinking of anything human or
similar to humanity. It is not an embryonic stage
of art in which such things are made — as if they
were not able to speak more plainly and portray
more sensibly in the age when such images were
honoured ! Rather, men are afraid of just one thing
— direct speaking out. Just as the cella hides and
conceals in a mysterious twilight, yet not completely,
the holy of holies, the real numen of the Deity; just
as, again, the peripteric temple hides the cella, pro-
tecting it from indiscreet eyes as with a screen and
a veil, yet not completely — so it is with the image of
the Deity, and at the same time the concealment of

* The play on bergen (shelter) and verbergen (hide) is un-
translateable.— Tr.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 117

the Deity. — Only when outside the cult, in the pro-
fane world of athletic contest, the joy in the victor
had risen so high that the ripples thus started
reacted upon the lake of religious emotion, was
the statue of the victor set up before the temple.
Then the pious pilgrim had to accustom his eye
and his soul, whether he would or no, to the inevit-
able sight of human beauty and super-strength, so
that the worship of men and Gods melted into each
other from physical and spiritual contact. Then too
for the first time the fear of really humanising the
figures of the Gods is lost, and the mighty arena for
great plastic art is opened — even now with the limi-
tation that wherever there is to be adoration the
primitive form and ugliness are carefully preserved
and copied. But the Hellene, as he dedicates and
makes offerings, may now with religious sanction
indulge in his delight in making God become a man.



223.

Whither We must Travel. — Immediate self-
observation is not enough, by a long way, to enable
us to learn to know ourselves. We need history, for
the past continues to flow through us in a hundred
channels. We ourselves are, after all, nothing but
our own sensation at every moment of this continued
flow. Even here, when we wish to step down into
the stream of our apparently most peculiar and per-
sonal development, Heraclitus' aphorism, "You can-
not step twice into the same river," holds good. —
This is a piece of wisdom which has, indeed, gradu-
ally become trite, but nevertheless has remained as



Il8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

strong and true as it ever was. It is the same with
the saying that, in order to understand history, we
must scrutinise the living remains of historical
periods ; that we must travel, as old Herodotus tra-
velled, to other nations, especially to those so-called
savage or half-savage races in regions where man
has doffed or not yet donned European garb. For
they are ancient and firmly established steps of
culture on which we can stand. There is, however,
a more subtle art and aim in travelling, which does
not always necessitate our passing from place to
place and going thousands of miles away. Very
probably the last three centuries, in all their colour-
ings and refractions of culture, survive even in our
vicinity, only they have to be discovered. In some
families, or even in individuals, the strata are still
superimposed on each other, beautifully and per-
ceptibly ; in other places there are dispersions and
displacements of the structure which are harder to
understand. Certainly in remote districts, in less
known mountain valleys, circumscribed communi-
ties have been able more easily to maintain an ad-
mirable pattern of a far older sentiment, a pattern
that must here be investigated. On the other hand,
it is improbable that such discoveries will be made
in Berlin, where man comes into the world washed-
out and sapless. He who after long practice of this
art of travel has become a hundred-eyed Argus will
accompany his Io — I mean his ego — everywhere, and
in Egypt and Greece, Byzantium and Rome, France
and Germany, in the age of wandering or settled
races, in Renaissance or Reformation, at home and
abroad, in sea, forest, plant, and mountain, will again



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 119

light upon the travel-adventure of this ever-growing,
ever -altered ego. — Thus self-knowledge becomes
universal knowledge as regards the entire past, and,
by another chain of observation, which can only be
indicated here, self-direction and self-training in the
freest and most far-seeing spirits might become uni-
versal direction as regards all future humanity.



224.

Balm and Poison. — We cannot ponder too
deeply on this fact : Christianity is the religion of
antiquity grown old ; it presupposes degenerate old
culture-stocks,and on them it had, and still has, power
to work like balm. There are periods when ears and
eyes are full of slime, so that they can no longer
hear the voice of reason and philosophy or see the
wisdom that walks in bodily shape, whether it bears
the name of Epictetus or of Epicurus. Then, per-
haps, the erection of the martyr's cross and the
" trumpet of the last judgment " may have the effect
of still inspiring such races to end their lives de-
cently. If we think of Juvenal's Rome, of that
poisonous toad with the eyes of Venus, we under-
stand what it means to make the sign of the Cross
before the world, we honour the silent Christian com-
munity and are grateful for its having stifled the
Greco-Roman Empire. If, indeed, most men were
then born in spiritual slavery, with the sensuality of
old men, what a pleasure to meet beings who were
more soul than body, and who seemed to realise the
Greek idea of the shades of the under-world — shy,
scurrying, chirping, kindly creatures, with a rever-



120 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

sion on the " better life," and therefore so unassum-
ing, so secretly scornful, so proudly patient ! — This
Christianity, as the evening chime of the good an-
tiquity, with cracked, weary and yet melodious bell,
is balm in the ears even to one who only now tra-
verses those centuries historically. What must it
have been to those men themselves ! — To young and
fresh barbarian nations, on the other hand, Christi-
anity is a poison. For to implant the teaching of
sinfulness and damnation in the heroic, childlike,
and animal soul of the old Germans is nothing but
poisoning. An enormous chemical fermentation and
decomposition, a medley of sentiments and judg-
ments, a rank growth of adventurous legend, and
hence in the long run a fundamental weakening of
such barbarian peoples, was the inevitable result.
True, without this weakening what should we have
left of Greek culture, of the whole cultured past of
the human race ? For the barbarians untouched by
Christianity knew very well how to make a clean
sweep of old cultures, as was only too clearly shown
by the heathen conquerors of Romanised Britain.
Thus Christianity, against its will, was compelled to
aid in making "the antique world " immortal. — There
remains, however, a counter-question and the possi-
bility of a counter-reckoning. Without this weaken-
ing through the poisoning referred to, would any of
those fresh stocks — the Germans, for instance — have
been in a position gradually to find by themselves a
higher, a peculiar, a new culture, of which the most
distant conception would therefore have been lost
to humanity? — In this, as in every case, we do not
know, Christianly speaking, whether God owes the



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 121

devil or the devil God more thanks for everything
having turned out as it has.

225.
Faith makes Holy and Condemns. — A
Christian who happened upon forbidden paths of
thought might well ask himself on some occasion
whether it is really necessary that there should be a
God, side by side with a representative Lamb, if
faith in the existence of these beings suffices to pro-
duce the same influences? If they do exist after
all, are they not superfluous beings ? For all that
is given by the Christian religion to the human soul,
all that is beneficent, consoling, and edifying, just as
much as all that depresses and crushes, emanates
from that faith and not from the objects of that
faith. It is here as in another well-known case —
there were indeed no witches, but the terrible effects
of the belief in witches were the same as if they
really had existed. For all occasions where the
Christian awaits the immediate intervention of a
God, though in vain (for there is no God), his religion
is inventive enough to find subterfuges and reasons
for tranquillity. In so far Christianity is an ingenious
religion. — Faith, indeed, has up to the present not
been able to move real mountains, although I do
not know who assumed that it could. But it can
put mountains where there are none.

226.
The Tragi-Comedy of Regensburg. — Here
and there we see with terrible clearness the harle-
quinade of Fortune, how she fastens the rope, on



122 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

which she wills that succeeding centuries should
dance, on to a few days, one place, the condition
and opinions of one brain. Thus the fate of modern
German history lies in the days of that disputation
at Regensburg : the peaceful settlement of ecclesi-
astical and moral affairs, without religious wars or a
counter-reformation, and also the unity of the Ger-
man nation, seemed assured : the deep, gentle spirit of
Contarini hovered for one moment over the theologi-
cal squabble, victorious, as representative of the riper
Italian piety, reflecting the morning glory of intel-
lectual freedom. But Luther's hard head, full of
suspicions and strange misgivings, showed resist-
ance. Because justification by grace appeared to
him his greatest motto and discovery, he did not
believe the phrase in the mouth of Italians ; where-
as, in point of fact, as is well known, they had
invented it much earlier and spread it throughout
Italy in deep silence. In this apparent agreement
Luther saw the tricks of the devil, and hindered the
work of peace as well as he could, thereby advan-
cing to a great extent the aims of the Empire's foes.
— And now, in order to have a still stronger idea of
the dreadful farcicality of it all, let us add that none
of the principles about which men then disputed in
Regensburg — neither that of original sin, nor that of
redemption by proxy, nor that of justification by
faith — is in any way true or even has any connection
with truth : that they are now all recognised as in-
capable of being discussed. Yet on this account
the world was set on fire — that is to say, by opinions
which correspond to no things or realities ; whereas
as regards purely philological questions — as, for in-






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 23

stance, that of the sacramental words in the Eucharist
— discussion at any rate is permitted, because in this
case the truth can be said. But " where nothing is,
even truth has lost her right." * — Lastly, it only re-
mains to be said that it is true these principles give
rise to sources of power so mighty that without them
all the mills of the modern world could not be driven
with such force. And it is primarily a matter of
force, only secondarily of truth (and perhaps not
even secondarily) — is it not so, my dear up-to-date
friends ?

227.

Goethe's Errors. — Goethe is a signal excep-
tion among great artists in that he did not live
within the limited confines of his real capacity, as if
that must be the essential, the distinctive, the un-
conditional, and the last thing in him and for all the
world. Twice he intended to possess something
higher than he really possessed — and went astray
in the second half of his life, where he seems quite
convinced that he is one of the great scientific dis-
coverers and illuminators. So too in the first half
of his life he demanded of himself something higher
than the poetic art seemed to him — and here already
he made a mistake. That nature wished to make
him a plastic artist, — this was his inwardly glowing
and scorching secret, which finally drove him to
Italy, that he might give vent to his mania in this
direction and make to it every possible sacrifice.
At last, shrewd as he was, and honestly averse to

* Allusion to German proverb : " Where there is nothing,
the Emperor has lost his rights." — Tr.



124

any mental perversion in himself, he discovered that
a tricksy elf of desire had attracted him to the belief
in this calling, and that he must free himself of the
greatest passion of his heart and bid it farewell. The
painful conviction, tearing and gnawing at his vitals,
that it was necessary to bid farewell, finds full ex-
pression in the character of Tasso. Over Tasso,
that Werther intensified, hovers the premonition of
something worse than death, as when one says :
" Now it is over, after this farewell : how shall I go
on living without going mad? " These two funda-
mental errors of his life gave Goethe, in face of a
purely literary attitude towards poetry (the only
attitude then known to the world), such an unem-
barrassed and apparently almost arbitrary position.
Not to speak of the period when Schiller (poor
Schiller, who had no time himself and left no time
to others) drove away his shy dread of poetry, his
fear of all literary life and craftsmanship, Goethe
appears like a Greek who now and then visits his
beloved, doubting whether she be not a Goddess
to whom he can give no proper name. In all his
poetry one notices the inspiring neighbourhood of
plastic art and Nature. The features of these figures
that floated before him — and perhaps he always
thought he was on the track of the metamorphoses
of one Goddess — became, without his will or know-
ledge, the features of all the children of his art.
Without the extravagances of error he would not
have been Goethe — that is, the only German artist
in writing who has not yet become out of date — just
because he desired as little to be a writer as a German
by vocation.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 25
228.

Travellers and their Grades. — Among
travellers we may distinguish five grades. The
first and lowest grade is of those who travel and
are seen — they become really travelled and are, as
it were, blind. Next come those who really see
the world. The third class experience the results
of their seeing. The fourth weave their experience
into their life and carry it with them henceforth.
Lastly, there are some men of the highest strength
who, as soon as they have returned home, must
finally and necessarily work out in their lives and
productions all the things seen that they have
experienced and incorporated in themselves. — Like
these five species of travellers, all mankind goes
through the whole pilgrimage of life, the lowest as
purely passive, the highest as those who act and
live out their lives without keeping back any re-
sidue of inner experiences.

229.

In Climbing Higher. — So soon as we climb
higher than those who hitherto admired us, we
appear to them as sunken and fallen. For they
imagined that under all circumstances they were on
the heights in our company (maybe also through
our agency).

230.

Measure and Moderation.— Of twoquite lofty
things, measure and moderation, it is best never to
speak. A few know their force and significance,



126 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

from the mysterious paths of inner experiences
and conversions : they honour in them something
quite godlike, and are afraid to speak aloud. All
the rest hardly listen when they are spoken about,
and think the subjects under discussion are tedium
and mediocrity. We must perhaps except those
who have once heard a warning note from that
realm but have stopped their ears against the sound.
The recollection of it makes them angry and ex-
asperated.

231.

Humanity of Friendship and Comrade-
ship. — " If thou wilt take the left hand, then I will
go to the right," * that feeling is the hall-mark of
humanity in intimate intercourse, and without that
feeling every friendship, every band of apostles or
disciples, sooner or later becomes a fraud.

232.

The Profound.— Men of profound thought ap-
pear to themselves in intercourse with others like
comedians, for in order to be understood they must
always simulate superficiality.

233-

For the Scorners of " Herd-Humanity." —
He who regards human beings as a herd, and flies
from them as fast as he can, will certainly be caught
up by them and gored upon their horns.

* Genesis xiii. 9.— Tr.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 27
234.

The Main Transgression against the
VAIN. — In society, he who gives another an op-
portunity of favourably setting forth his knowledge,
sentiments, and experience sets himself above him.
Unless he is felt by the other to be a superior being
without limitation, he is guilty of an attack upon his
vanity, while what he aimed at was the gratification
of the other man's vanity.

235.
Disappointment. — When a long life of action
distinguished by speeches and writings gives pub-
licity to a man's personality, personal intercourse
with him is generally disappointing on two grounds.
Firstly, one expects too much from a brief period
of intercourse (namely, all that the thousand and
one opportunities of life can alone bring out).
Secondly, no recognised person gives himself the
trouble to woo recognition in individual cases. He
is too careless, and we are at too high a tension.

236.

Two Sources of Kindness. — To treat all men
with equal good-humour, and to be kind without
distinction of persons, may arise as much from a
profound contempt for mankind as from an in-
grained love of humanity.

237.
The Wanderer in the Mountains to Him-
self. — There are certain signs that you have gone



128 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

farther and higher. There is a freer, wider prospect
before you, the air blows cooler yet milder in your
face (you have unlearned the folly of confounding
mildness with warmth), your gait is more firm and
vigorous, courage and discretion have waxed to-
gether. On all these grounds your journey may
now be more lonely and in any case more perilous
than heretofore, if indeed not to the extent be-
lieved by those who from the misty valley see you,
the roamer, striding on the mountains.

238.

With the Exception of Our Neighbour.
— I admit that my head is set wrong on my neck
only, for every other man, as is well known, knows
better than I what I should do or leave alone.
The only one who cannot help me is myself, poor
beggar ! Are we not all like statues on which false
heads have been placed ? Eh, dear neighbour ? —
Ah no ; you, just you, are the exception !

239.
Caution. — We must either not go about at all
with people who are lacking in the reverence for
personalities, or inexorably fetter them beforehand
with the manacles of convention.

240.

The Wish to Appear Vain. — In conversation
with strangers or little-known acquaintances, to
express only selected thoughts, to speak of one's
famous acquaintances, and important experiences



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 29

and travels, is a sign that one is not proud, or at
least would not like to appear proud. Vanity is the
polite mask of pride.

241.

Good Friendship. — A good friendship arises
when the one man deeply respects the other, more
even than himself; loves him also, though not so
much as himself; and finally, to facilitate intercourse,
knows how to add the delicate bloom and veneer
of intimacy, but at the same time wisely refrains
from a true, real intimacy, from the confounding of
meum and tuum.

242.

Friends as Ghosts. — If we change ourselves
vitally, our friends, who have not changed, become
ghosts of our own past : their voice sounds shadowy
and dreadful to us, as if we heard our own voice
speaking, but younger, harder, less mellow.

243.
One]Eye andTwo Glances.— The same people
whose eyes naturally plead for favours and indul-
gences are accustomed, from their frequent humilia-
tions and cravings for revenge, to assume a shame-
less glance as well.

244.

The Haze of Distance.— A child throughout
life — that sounds very touching, but is only the
verdict from the distance. Seen and known close
at hand, he is always called "puerile throughout
life."

VOL. II. I



130 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

245.

Advantage and Disadvantage in the Same
Misunderstanding. — The mute perplexity of
the subtle brain is usually understood by the non-
subtle as a silent superiority, and is much dreaded
whereas the perception of perplexity would produce
good will.

246.

The Sage giving Himself out to be a
Fool. — The philanthropy of the sage sometimes
makes him decide to pretend to be excited, enraged,
or delighted, so that he may not hurt his surround-
ings by the coldness and rationality of his true
nature.

247.

Forcing Oneself to Attention. — So soon
as we note that any one in intercourse and conver-
sation with us has to force himself to attention, we
have adequate evidence that he loves us not, or loves
us no longer.

248.

The Way to a Christian Virtue.— Learning
from one's enemies is the best way to love them, for
it inspires us with a grateful mood towards them.

249.
Stratagem of the Importunate. — The im-
portunate man gives us gold coins as change for
our convention coins, and thereby tries to force us
afterwards to treat our convention as an oversight
and him as an exception.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 131
250.

Reason for Dislike.— We become hostile to
many an artist or writer, not because we notice in
the end that he has duped us, but because he did
not find more subtle means necessary to entrap us.

251.

IN PARTING. — Not by the way one soul ap-
proaches another, but by the way it separates, do I
recognise its relationship and homogeneity with the
other.

252.

SlLENTiUM. — We must not speak about our
friends, or we renounce the sentiment of friendship.

253.
Impoliteness. — Impoliteness is often the sign
of a clumsy modesty, which when taken by surprise
loses its head and would fain hide the fact by means
of rudeness.

254.

Honesty's Miscalculation. — Our newest ac-
quaintances are sometimes the first to learn what
we have hitherto kept dark. We have the foolish
notion that our proof of confidence is the strongest
fetter wherewith to hold them fast. But they do
not know enough about us to feel so strongly the
sacrifice involved in our speaking out, and betray
our secrets to others without any idea of betrayal.
Hereby we possibly lose our old friends.



132 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-IIUMAN.

255.

In the Ante-Chamber of Favour.— All men
whom we let stand long in the ante-chamber of our
favour get into a state of fermentation or become
bitter.

256.

Warning to the Despised. — When we have
sunk unmistakably in the estimation of mankind
we should cling tooth and nail to modesty in inter-
course, or we shall betray to others that we have
sunk in our own estimation as well. Cynicism in
intercourse is a sign that a man, when alone, treats
himself too as a dog.

257.

Ignorance often Ennobles. — With regard to
the respect of those who pay respect, it is an ad-
vantage ostensibly not to understand certain things.
Ignorance, too, confers privileges.

258.

The Opponent of Grace. — The impatient and
arrogant man does not care for grace, feeling it
to be a corporeal, visible reproach against himself.
For grace is heartfelt toleration in movement and
gesture.

259.

On Seeing Again. — When old friends see each
other again after a long separation, it often happens
that they affect an interest in matters to which they



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 33

have long since become indifferent. Sometimes
both remark this, but dare not raise the veil — from
a mournful doubt. Hence arise conversations as
in the realm of the dead.

260.

Making Friends only with the Industri-
ous. — The man of leisure is dangerous to his friends,
for, having nothing to do, he talks of what his friends
are doing or not doing, interferes, and finally makes
himself a nuisance. The clever man will only make
friends with the industrious.

261.

One Weapon twice as much as Two. — It is
an unequal combat when one man defends his
cause with head and heart, the other with head
alone. The first has sun and wind against him, as
it were, and his two weapons interfere with each
other: he loses the prize — in the eyes of truth.
True, the victory of the second, with his one
weapon, is seldom a victory after the hearts of all
the other spectators, and makes him unpopular.

262.

Depth and Troubled Waters. — The public
easily confounds him who fishes in troubled waters
with him who pumps up from the depths.

263.

Demonstrating One's Vanity to Friend
AND Foe. — Many a man, from vanity, maltreats



134 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






even his friends, when in the presence of witnesses
to whom he wishes to make his own preponderance
clear. Others exaggerate the merits of their enemies,
in order to point proudly to the fact that they are
worthy of such foes.

264.

Cooling Off. — The over-heating of the heart is
generally allied with illness of the head and judg-
ment. He who is concerned for a time with the
health of his head must know what he has to cool,
careless of the future of his heart. For if we are
capable at all of giving warmth, we are sure to
become warm again and then have our summer.

265.

Mingled Feelings. — Towards science women
and self-seeking artists entertain a feeling that is
composed of envy and sentimentality.

266.

Where Danger is Greatest. — We seldom
break our leg so long as life continues a toilsome
upward climb. The danger comes when we begin
to take things easily and choose the convenient
paths.

267.

Not TOO Early. — We must beware of becoming
sharp too early, or we shall also become thin too
early.

268.

Joy in Refractoriness. — The good teacher
knows cases where he is proud that his pupil re-



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 35

mains true to himself in opposition to him — at
times when the youth must not understand the man
or would be harmed by understanding him.

269.

The Experiment of Honesty.— Young men,
who wish to be more honest than they have been,
seek as victim some one acknowledged to be honest,
attacking him first with an attempt to reach his
height by abuse — with the underlying notion that
this first experiment at any rate is void of danger.
For just such a one has no right to chastise the
impudence of the honest man.

270.

The Eternal Child.— We think, short-sighted
that we are, that fairy-tales and games belong to
childhood. As if at any age we should care to live
without fairy-tales and games ! Our words and
sentiments are indeed different, but the essential
fact remains the same, as is proved by the child
himself looking on games as his work and fairy-
tales as his truth. The shortness of life ought to
preserve us from a pedantic distinction between the
different ages — as if every age brought something
new — and a poet ought one day to portray a man
of two hundred, who really lives without fairy-tales
and games.

271.

Every Philosophy is the Philosophy of a
Period of Life. — The period of life in which a
philosopher finds his teaching is manifested by his



136 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

teaching; he cannot avoid that, however elevated
above time and hour he may feel himself. Thus,
Schopenhauer's philosophy remains a mirror of his
hot and melancholy youth — it is no mode of thought
for older men. Plato's philosophy reminds one of
the middle thirties, when a warm and a cold current
generally rush together, so that spray and delicate
clouds and, under favourable circumstances and
glimpses of sunshine, enchanting rainbow-pictures
result.

272.

Of the Intellect of Women. — The intel-
lectual strength of a woman is best proved by the
fact that she offers her own intellect as a sacrifice
out of love for a man and his intellect, and that
nevertheless in the new domain, which was previously
foreign to her nature, a second intellect at once
arises as an aftergrowth, to which the man's mind
impels her.

273.

Raising and Lowering in the Sexual
DOMAIN. — The storm of desire will sometimes
carry a man up to a height where all desire is
silenced, where he really loves and lives in a better
state of being rather than in a better state of choice.
On the other hand, a good woman, from true love,
often climbs down to desire, and lowers herself in
her own eyes. The latter action in particular is one
of the most pathetic sensations which the idea of a
good marriage can involve.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 37
274.

Man Promises, Woman Fulfils.— -By woman
Nature shows how far she has hitherto achieved her
task of fashioning humanity, by man she shows
what she has had to overcome and what she still
proposes to do for humanity. — The most perfect
woman of every age is the holiday-task of the
Creator on every seventh day of culture, the re-
creation of the artist from his work.

275.

Transplanting.— If we have spent our intellect
in order to gain mastery over the intemperance of
the passions, the sad result often follows that we
transfer the intemperance to the intellect, and from
that time forth are extravagant in thought and desire
of knowledge.

276.

Laughter as Treachery. — How and when a
woman laughs is a sign of her culture, but in the ring
of laughter her nature reveals itself, and in highly
cultured women perhaps even the last insoluble
residue of their nature. Hence the psychologist
will say with Horace, though from different reasons :
" Ridete puellae."

277.

From the Youthful Soul. — Youths varyingly
show devotion and impudence towards the same
person, because at bottom they only despise or ad-
mire themselves in that other person, and between



138 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

the two feelings but stagger to and fro in them-
selves, so long as they have not found in experience
the measure of their will and ability.

278.

For the Amelioration of the World.— If
we forbade the discontented, the sullen, and the
atrabilious to propagate, we might transform the
world into a garden of happiness. — This aphorism
belongs to a practical philosophy for the female sex.

279.

Not to Distrust your Emotions. — The
feminine phrase " Do not distrust your emotions "
does not mean much more than " Eat what tastes
good to you." This may also, especially for moder-
ate natures, be a good everyday rule. But other
natures must live according to another maxim :
" You must eat not only with your mouth but also
with your brain, in order that the greediness of
your mouth may not prove your undoing."

280.

A Cruel Fancy of Love. — Every great love
involves the cruel thought of killing the object of
love, so that it may be removed once for all from
the mischievous play of change. For love is more
afraid of change than of destruction.

281.
DOORS. — In everything that is learnt or experi-
enced, the child, just like the man, sees doors ;



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 39

but for the former they are places to go to, for the
latter to go through.

282.

Sympathetic Women. — The sympathy of
women, which is talkative, takes the sick-bed to
market.

283.

Early Merit. — He who acquires merit early in
life tends to forget all reverence for age and old
people, and accordingly, greatly to his disadvantage,
excludes himself from the society of the mature,
those who confer maturity. Thus in spite of his
early merit he remains green, importunate, and
boyish longer than others.

284.

Souls All of a Piece. — Women and artists
think that where we do not contradict them we can-
not. Reverence on ten counts and silent disap-
proval on ten others appears to them an impossible
combination, because their souls are all of a piece.

285.

YOUNG Talents. — With respect to young talents
we must strictly follow Goethe's maxim, that we
should often avoid harming error in order to avoid
harming truth. Their condition is like the diseases
of pregnancy, and involves strange appetites. These
appetites should be satisfied and humoured as far
as possible, for the sake of the fruit they may be ex-
pected to produce. It is true that, as nurse of these



140 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

remarkable invalids, one must learn the difficult
art of voluntary self-abasement.

286.

Disgust with Truth.— Women are so consti-
tuted that all truth (in relation to men, love, child-
ren, society, aim of life) disgusts them — and that
they try to be revenged on every one who opens
their eyes.

287.

The Source of Great Love. — Whence arises
the sudden passion of a man for a woman, a passion
so deep, so vital ? Least of all from sensuality only :
but when a man finds weakness, need of help, and
high spirits united in the same creature, he suffers
a sort of overflowing of soul, and is touched and
offended at the same moment. At this point arises
the source of great love.

288.

Cleanliness. — In the child, the sense for clean-
liness should be fanned into a passion, and then
later on he will raise himself, in ever new phases,
to almost every virtue, and will finally appear, in
compensation for all talent, as a shining cloud of
purity, temperance, gentleness, and character, happy
in himself and spreading happiness around.

289.

Of Vain Old Men. — Profundity of thought
belongs to youth, clarity of thought to old age.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 141

When, in spite of this, old men sometimes speak
and write in the manner of the profound, they do so
from vanity, imagining that they thereby assume
the charm of juvenility, enthusiasm, growth, appre-
hensiveness, hopefulness.

290.
Enjoyment of Novelty. — Men use a new lesson
or experience later on as a ploughshare or perhaps
also as a weapon, women at once make it into an
ornament.

291.
How both Sexes behave when in the Right.
— If it is conceded to a woman that she is right,
she cannot deny herself the triumph of setting her
heel on the neck of the vanquished ; she must taste
her victory to the full. On the other hand, man
towards man in such a case is ashamed of being
right. But then man is accustomed to victory ; with
woman it is an exception.

292.
Abnegation in the Will to Beauty. — In
order to become beautiful, a woman must not desire
to be considered pretty. That is to say, in ninety-
nine out of a hundred cases where she could please
she must scorn and put aside all thoughts of pleas-
ing. Only then can she ever reap the delight of
him whose soul's portal is wide enough to admit
the great.

293.
Unintelligible, Unendurable. — A youth
cannot understand that an old man has also had



I42 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

his delights, his dawns of feeling, his changings and
soarings of thought. It offends him to think that
such things have existed before. But it makes him
very bitter to hear that, to become fruitful, he must
lose those buds and dispense with their fragrance.

294.

The Party with the Air of Martyrdom. —
Every party that can assume an air of martyrdom
wins good-natured souls over to its side and thereby
itself acquires an air of good nature — greatly to its
advantage.

295.

Assertions surer than Arguments.— -An
assertion has, with the majority of men at any
rate, more effect than an argument, for arguments
provoke mistrust. Hence demagogues seek to
strengthen the arguments of their party by asser-
tions.

296.

The Best Concealers. — All regularly success-
ful men are profoundly cunning in making their
faults and weaknesses look like manifestations of
strength. This proves that they must know their
defects uncommonly well.

297.

From Time to Time. — He sat in the city gate-
way and said to one who passed through that this
was the city gate. The latter replied that this was
true, but that one must not be too much in the






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 43

right if one expected to be thanked for it. " Oh,"
answered the other, " I don't want thanks, but from
time to time it is very pleasant not merely to be in
the right but to remain in the right."

298.

Virtue was not Invented by the Germans.
— Goethe's nobleness and freedom from envy, Bee-
thoven's fine hermitical resignation, Mozart's cheer-
fulness and grace of heart, Handel's unbending
manliness and freedom under the law, Bach's con-
fident and luminous inner life, such as does not
even need to renounce glamour and success — are
these qualities peculiarly German ? — If they are not,
they at least prove to what goal Germans should
strive and to what they can attain.

299.

Pia Fraus or Something Else. — I hope I am
mistaken, but I think that in Germany of to-day a V

twofold sort of hypocrisy is set up as the duty of the
moment for every one. From imperial-political mis-
givings Germanism is demanded, and from social
apprehensions Christianity — but both only in words
and gestures, and particularly in ability to keep silent.
It is the veneer that nowadays costs so much and is
paid for so highly ; and for the benefit of the spec-
tators the face of the nation assumes German and
Christian wrinkles.

300.

HOW FAR EVEN IN THE GOOD THE HALF MAY

be More than the Whole. — In all things that



144 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

are constructed to last and demand the service of
many hands, much that is less good must be made
a rule, although the organiser knows what is better
and harder very well. He will calculate that there
will never be a lack of persons who can correspond
to the rule, and he knows that the middling good is
the rule. — The youth seldom sees this point, and as
an innovator thinks how marvellously he is in the
right and how strange is the blindness of others.



301.

The PARTISAN. — The true partisan learns no-
thing more, he only experiences and judges. It is
significant that Solon, who was never a partisan but
pursued his aims above and apart from parties or
even against them, was the father of that simple
phrase wherein lies the secret of the health and
vitality of Athens : " I grow old, but I am always
learning."

302.

What is German according to Goethe.—
They are really intolerable people of whom one
cannot even accept the good, who have freedom of
disposition but do not remark that they are lacking
in freedom of taste and spirit. Yet just this, accord-
ing to Goethe's well-weighed judgment, is German. —
His voice and his example indicate that the German
should be more than a German if he wishes to be
useful or even endurable to other nations — and
which direction his striving should take, in order
that he may rise above and beyond himself.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 145
303.

When it is Necessary to Remain Station-
ary. — When the masses begin to rage, and reason
is under a cloud, it is a good thing, if the health of
one's soul is not quite assured, to go under a door-
way and look out to see what the weather is like.

304.
The Revolution-Spirit and the Posses-
sion-Spirit.— The only remedy against Socialism
that still lies in your power is to avoid provoking
Socialism — in other words, to live in moderation and
contentment, to prevent as far as possible all lavish
display, and to aid the State as far as possible in its
taxing of all superfluities and luxuries. You do not
like this remedy ? Then, you rich bourgeois who
call yourselves "Liberals," confess that it is your own
inclination that you find so terrible and menacing
in Socialists, but allow to prevail in yourselves as
unavoidable, as if with you it were something
different. As you are constituted, if you had not
your fortune and the cares of maintaining it, this
bent of yours would make Socialists of you. Pos-
session alone differentiates you from them. If you
wish to conquer the assailants of your prosperity,
you must first conquer yourselves. — And if that
prosperity only meant well-being, it would not be
so external and provocative of envy ; it would be
more generous, more benevolent, more compensatory,
more helpful. But the spurious, histrionic element in
your pleasures, which lie more in the feeling of con-
trast (because others have them not, and feel envious)
VOL. 11. K



146 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

than in feelings of realised and heightened power —
your houses, dresses, carriages, shops, the demands
of your palates and your tables, your noisy operatic
and musical enthusiasm ; lastly your women, formed
and fashioned but of base metal, gilded but with-
out the ring of gold, chosen by you for show and
considering themselves meant for show — these are
the things that spread the poison of that national
disease, which seizes the masses ever more and more
as a Socialistic heart-itch, but has its origin and
breeding-place in you. Who shall now arrest this
epidemic ?

305.

PARTY Tactics. — When a party observes that a
previous member has changed from an unqualified
to a qualified adherent, it endures it so ill that
it irritates and mortifies him in every possible way
with the object of forcing him to a decisive break
and making him an opponent. For the party sus-
pects that the intention of finding a relative value
in its faith, a value which admits of pro and con, of
weighing and discarding, is more dangerous than
downright opposition.



306.

For the Strengthening of Parties. — Who-
ever wishes to strengthen a party internally should
give it an opportunity of being forcibly treated
with obvious injustice. The party thus acquires a
capital of good conscience, which hitherto it perhaps
lacked.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 47
307.

To Provide for One's Past. — As men after
all only respect the old-established and slowly-
developed, he who would survive after his death
must not only provide for posterity but still more
for the past. Hence tyrants of every sort (including
tyrannical artists and politicians) like to do violence
to history, so that history may seem a preparation
and a ladder up to them.

308.

Party Writers. — The beating of drums, which
delights young writers who serve a party, sounds
to him who does not belong to the party like a
rattling of chains, and excites sympathy rather than
admiration.

309.

Taking Sides against Ourselves. — Our
followers never forgive us for taking sides against
ourselves, for we seem in their eyes not only to be
spurning their love but to be exposing them to the
charge of lack of intelligence.

310.

Danger in Wealth. — Only a man of intellect
should hold property : otherwise property is danger-
ous to the community. For the owner, not knowing
how to make use of the leisure which his possessions
might secure to him, will continue to strive after
more property. This strife will be his occupation,
his strategy in the war with ennui. So in the end



I48 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

real wealth is produced from the moderate property
that would be enough for an intellectual man. Such
wealth, then, is the glittering outcrop of intellectual
dependence and poverty, but it looks quite different
from what its humble origin might lead one to expect,
because it can mask itself with culture and art — it
can, in fact, purchase the mask. Hence it excites
envy in the poor and uncultured — who at bottom
always envy culture and see no mask in the mask —
and gradually paves the way for a social revolution.
For a gilded coarseness and a histrionic blowing of
trumpets in the pretended enjoyment of culture
inspires that class with the thought, "It is only a
matter of money," whereas it is indeed to some ex-
tent a matter of money, but far more of intellect.

311.
Joy in Commanding and Obeying. — Com-
manding is a joy, like obeying ; the former when it
has not yet become a habit, the latter just when it
has become a habit. Old servants under new
masters advance each other mutually in giving
pleasure.

312.

Ambition for a Forlorn Hope. — There is an
ambition for a forlorn hope which forces a party to
place itself at the post of extreme danger.

313.
When Asses are Needed. — We shall not move
the crowd to cry " Hosanna ! " until we have ridden
into the city upon an ass.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 149
314.

Party Usage. — Every party attempts to repre-
sent the important elements that have sprung up
outside it as unimportant, and if it does not succeed,
it attacks those elements the more bitterly, the more
excellent they are.

315.

Becoming Empty. — Of him who abandons him-
self to the course of events, a smaller and smaller
residue is continually left, Great politicians may
therefore become quite empty men, although they
were once full and rich.

316.

Welcome Enemies. — The Socialistic move-
ments are nowadays becoming more and more
agreeable rather than terrifying to the dynastic
governments, because by these movements they are
provided with a right and a weapon for making ex-
ceptional rules, and can thus attack their real bogies,
democrats and anti-dynasts. — Towards all that such
governments professedly detest they feel a secret
cordiality and inclination. But they are compelled
to draw the veil over their soul.

317.

Possession Possesses.— Only up to a certain
point does possession make men feel freer and more
independent ; one step farther, and possession be-
comes lord, the possessor a slave. The latter must



150 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

sacrifice his time, his thoughts to the former, and
feels himself compelled to an intercourse, nailed to
a spot, incorporated with the State — perhaps quite
in conflict with his real and essential needs.



318.

Of the Mastery of Them that Know. — It
is easy, ridiculously easy, to set up a model for the
choice of a legislative body. First of all the honest
and reliable men of the nation, who at the same
time are masters and experts in some one branch,
have to become prominent by mutual scenting-out
and recognition. From these, by a narrower process
of selection, the learned and expert of the first rank
in each individual branch must again be chosen, also
by mutual recognition and guarantee. If the legis-
lative body be composed of these, it will finally be
necessary, in each individual case, that only the
voices and judgments of the most specialised ex-
perts should decide; the honesty of all the rest
should have become so great that it is simply a
matter of decency to leave the voting also in the
hands of these men. The result would be that
the law, in the strictest sense, would emanate from
the intelligence of the most intelligent. — As things
now are, voting is done by parties, and at every
division there must be hundreds of uneasy con-
sciences among the ill-taught, the incapable of judg-
ment, among those who merely repeat, imitate, and
go with the tide. Nothing lowers the dignity of
a new law so much as this inherent shamefaced
feeling of insincerity that necessarily results at every



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 51

party division. But, as has been said, it is easy,
ridiculously easy, to set up such a model : no power
on earth is at present strong enough to realise such
an ideal — unless the belief in the highest utility of
knowledge, and of those that know, at last dawns
even upon the most hostile minds and is preferred
to the prevalent belief in majorities. In the sense
of such a future may our watchword be : " More
reverence for them that know, and down with all
parties ! "

319-

Of the " Nation of Thinkers " (or of Bad
Thinking). — The vague, vacillating, premonitory,
elementary, intuitive elements — to choose obscure
names for obscure things — that are attributed to the
German nature would be, if they really still existed,
a proof that our culture has remained several stages
behind and is still surrounded by the spell and
atmosphere of the Middle Ages. — It is true that in
this backwardness there are certain advantages : by
these qualities the Germans (if, as has been said
before, they still possess them) would possess the
capacity, which other nations have now lost, for
doing certain things and particularly for under-
standing certain things. Much undoubtedly is lost
if the lack of sense — which is just the common
factor in all those qualities — is lost. Here too, how-
ever, there are no losses without the highest com-
pensatory gains, so that no reason is left for
lamenting, granting that we do not, like children,
and gourmands, wish to enjoy at once the fruits of
all seasons of the year.



152



320.



Carrying Coals to Newcastle. — The govern-
ments of the great States have two instruments for
keeping the people dependent,in fear and obedience:
a coarser, the army, and a more refined, the school.
With the aid of the former they win over to their
side the ambition of the higher strata and the
strength of the lower, so far as both are character-
istic of active and energetic men of moderate or
inferior gifts. With the aid of the latter they win
over gifted poverty, especially the intellectually pre-
tentious semi-poverty of the middle classes. Above
all, they make teachers of all grades into an intel-
lectual court looking unconsciously "towards the
heights." By putting obstacle after obstacle in the
way of private schools and the wholly distasteful
individual tuition they secure the disposal of a
considerable number of educational posts, towards
which numerous hungry and submissive eyes are
turned to an extent five times as great as can ever
be satisfied. These posts, however, must support
the holder but meagrely, so that he maintains a
feverish thirst for promotion and becomes still more
closely attached to the views of the government.
For it is always more advantageous to foster
moderate discontent than contentment, the mother
of courage, the grandmother of free thought and
exuberance. By means of this physically and
mentally bridled body of teachers, the youth of the
country is as far as possible raised to a certain level
of culture that is useful to the State and arranged
on a suitable sliding-scale. Above all, the immature



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 53

and ambitious minds of all classes are almost imper-
ceptibly imbued with the idea that only a career
which is recognised and hall-marked by the State
can lead immediately to social distinction. The
effect of this belief in government examinations and
titles goes so far that even men who have remained
independent and have risen by trade or handicraft
still feel a pang of discontent in their hearts until
their position too is marked and acknowledged by a
gracious bestowal of rank and orders from above —
until one becomes a " somebody." Finally the State
connects all these hundreds of offices and posts in its
hands with the obligation of being trained and hall-
marked in these State schools if one ever wishes to
enter this charmed circle. Honour in society, daily
bread, the possibility of a family, protection from
above, the feeling of community in a common
culture — all this forms a network of hopes into
which every young man walks : how should he feel
the slightest breath of mistrust ? In the end, per-
haps, the obligation of being a soldier for one year
has become with every one, after the lapse of a few
generations, an unreflecting habit, an understood
thing, with an eye to which we construct the plan
of our lives quite early. Then the State can venture
on the master-stroke of weaving together school
and army, talent, ambition and strength by means
of common advantages — that is, by attracting the
more highly gifted on favourable terms to the army
and inspiring them with the military spirit of joyful
obedience; so that finally, perhaps, they become
attached permanently to the flag and endow it by
their talents with an ever new and more brilliant



154



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



lustre. Then nothing more is wanted but an oppor-
tunity for great wars. These are provided from
professional reasons (and so in all innocence) by
diplomats, aided by newspapers and Stock Ex-
changes. For" the nation," as a nation of soldiers,
need never be supplied with a good conscience in
war — it has one already.



321.

The Press. — If we consider how even to-day all
great political transactions glide upon the stage
secretly and stealthily ; how they are hidden by
unimportant events, and seem small when close at
hand ; how they only show their far-reaching effect,
and leave the soil still quaking, long after they have
taken place; — what significance can we attach to
the Press in its present position, with its daily ex-
penditure of lung-power in order to bawl, to deafen,
to excite, to terrify? Is it anything more than an
everlasting false alarm, which tries to lead our ears
and our wits into a false direction ?



322.

After a Great Event. — A nation and a man
whose soul has come to light through some great
event generally feel the immediate need of some
act of childishness or coarseness, as much from
shame as for purposes of recreation.



323.
To be a Good German means to de-Ger-
MANISE^ONESELF. — National differences consist,



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 55

far more than has hitherto been observed, only in
the differences of various grades of culture, and are
only to a very small extent permanent (nor even
that in a strict sense). For this reason all arguments
based on national character are so little binding on
one who aims at the alteration of convictions — in
other words, at culture. If, for instance, we consider
all that has already been German, we shall improve
upon the hypothetical question, "What is German ? "
by the counter-question, " What is now German ? "
and every good German will answer it practically,
by overcoming his German characteristics. For
when a nation advances and grows, it bursts the
girdle previously given to it by its national outlook.
When it remains stationary or declines, its soul is
surrounded by a fresh girdle, and the crust, as it
becomes harder and harder, builds a prison around,
with walls growing ever higher. Hence if a nation
has much that is firmly established, this is a sign
that it wishes to petrify and would like to become
nothing but a monument. This happened, from a
definite date, in the case of Egypt. So he who is
well-disposed towards the Germans may for his part
consider how he may more and more grow out of
what is German. The tendency to be un-German
has therefore always been a mark of efficient mem-
bers of our nation.

324.

Foreignisms. — A foreigner who travelled in Ger-
many found favour or the reverse by certain asser-
tions of his, according to the districts in which he
stayed. All intelligent Suabians, he used to say,



156 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

are coquettish. — The other Suabians still believed
that Uhland was a poet and Goethe immoral. — The
best about German novels now in vogue was that
one need not read them, for one knew already what
they contained. — The native of Berlin seemed more
good-humoured than the South German, for he was
all too fond of mocking, and so could endure
mockery himself, which the South German could
not. — The intellect of the Germans was kept down
by their beer and their newspapers : he recom-
mended them tea and pamphlets, of course as a
cure. — He advised us to contemplate the different
nations of worn-out Europe and see how well each
displayed some particular quality of old age, to the
delight of those who sit before the great spectacle :
how the French successfully represent the clever-
ness and amiability of old age, the English the
experience and reserve, the Italians the innocence
and candour. Can the other masks of old age be
wanting ? Where is the proud old man, the dom-
ineering old man, the covetous old man ? — The
most dangerous region in Germany was Saxony and
Thuringia : nowhere else was there more mental
nimbleness, more knowledge of men, side by side
with freedom of thought; and all this was so
modestly veiled by the ugly dialect and the zealous
officiousness of the inhabitants that one hardly
noticed that one here had to deal with the intel-
lectual drill-sergeants of Germany, her teachers for
good or evil. — The arrogance of the North Germans
was kept in check by their tendency to obey, that
of the South Germans by their tendency — to make
themselves comfortable. — It appeared to him that



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 57

in their women German men possessed awkward
but self-opinionated housewives, who belauded
themselves so perseveringly that they had almost
persuaded the world, and at any rate their husbands,
of their peculiarly German housewifely virtue. —
When the conversation turned on Germany's home
and foreign policy, he used to say (he called it
" betray the secret ") that Germany's greatest states-
man did not believe in great statesmen. — The future
of Germany he found menaced and menacing, for
Germans had forgotten how to enjoy themselves (an
art that the Italians understood so well), but, by the
great games of chance called wars and dynastic
revolutions, had accustomed themselves to emotion-
alism, and consequently would one day have an
tmeute. For that is the strongest emotion that a
nation can procure for itself. — The German Socialist
was all the more dangerous because impelled by
no definite necessity : his trouble lay in not knowing
what he wanted ; so, even if he attained many of
his objects, he would still pine away from desire
in the midst of delights, just like Faust, but pre-
sumably like a very vulgar Faust. " For the Faust-
Devil," he finally exclaimed, " by whom cultured
Germans were so much plagued, was exorcised by
Bismarck ; but now the Devil has entered into the
swine * and is worse than ever ! "

325.
Opinions. — Most men are nothing and count
for nothing until they have arrayed themselves in

* Luke viii. 33. — Tr.



158 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

universal convictions and public opinions. This is
in accordance with the tailors' philosophy, " The
apparel makes the man." Of exceptional men,
however, it must be said, " The wearer primarily
makes the apparel." Here opinions cease to be
public, and become something else than masks,
ornament, and disguise.

326.

Two Kinds of Sobriety.— In order not to con-
found the sobriety arising from mental exhaustion
with that arising from moderation, one must remark
that the former is peevish, the latter cheerful.

327.

Debasement of Joy. — To call a thing good not
a day longer than it appears to us good, and above
all not a day earlier — that is the only way to keep
joy pure. Otherwise, joy all too easily becomes in-
sipid and rotten to the taste, and counts, for whole
strata of the people, among the adulterated food-
stuffs.

328.

The Scapegoat of Virtue. — When a man
does his very best, those who mean well towards
him, but are not capable of appreciating him,
speedily seek a scapegoat to immolate, thinking it
is the scapegoat of sin — but it is the scapegoat of
virtue.

329.

Sovereignty. — 1?o honour and acknowledge
even the bad, when it pleases one, and to have no



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 59

conception of how one could be ashamed of being
pleased thereat, is the mark of sovereignty in things
great and small.

330.

Influence a Phantom, not a Reality —
The man of mark gradually learns that so far as
he has influence he is a phantom in other brains,
and perhaps he falls into a state of subtle vexation
of soul, in which he asks himself whether he must
not maintain this phantom of himself for the benefit
of his fellow-men.

331.

Giving and Taking.— When one takes away
(or anticipates) the smallest thing that another
possesses, the latter is blind to the fact that he has
been given something greater, nay, even the greatest
thing.

332.

Good Ploughland. — All rejection and negation
betoken a deficiency in fertility. If we were good
ploughland, we should allow nothing to be unused
or lost, and in every thing, event, or person we
should welcome manure, rain, or sunshine.

333.
Intercourse as an Enjoyment.— If a man
renounces the world and intentionally lives in soli-
tude, he may come to regard intercourse with
others, which he enjoys but seldom, as a special
delicacy.



160 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

334-

To Know how to Suffer in Public. — We
must advertise our misfortunes and from time to
time heave audible sighs and show visible marks
of impatience. For if we could let others see how
assured and happy we are in spite of pain and
privation, how envious and ill-tempered they would
become at the sight ! — But we must take care not
to corrupt our fellow-men; besides, if they knew
the truth, they would levy a heavy toll upon us.
At any rate our public misfortune is our private
advantage.

335.
Warmth on the Heights. — On the heights
it is warmer than people in the valleys suppose,
especially in winter. The thinker recognises the full
import of this simile.

336.

To Will the Good and be Capable of the
Beautiful. — It is not enough to practise the good
one must have willed it, and, as the poet says, in-
clude the Godhead in our will. But the beautiful
we must not will, we must be capable of it, in inno-
cence and blindness, without any psychical curiosity.
He that lights his lantern to find perfect men
should remember the token by which to know
them. They are the men who always act for the
sake of the good and in so doing always attain
to the beautiful without thinking of the beautiful.
Many better and nobler men, from impotence or
from want of beauty in their souls, remain unre-



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. l6l

freshing and ugly to behold, with all their good
will and good works. They rebuff and injure even
virtue through the repulsive garb in which their
bad taste arrays her.

337-
Danger of Renunciation. — We must beware
of basing our lives on too narrow a foundation of
appetite. For if we renounce all the joys involved
in positions, honours, associations, revels, creature
comforts, and arts, a day may come when we per-
ceive that this repudiation has led us not to wisdom
but to satiety of life.

338.
Final Opinion on Opinions. — Either we
should hide our opinions or hide ourselves behind
our opinions. Whoever does otherwise, does not
know the way of the world, or belongs to the order
of pious fire-eaters.

339.
" Gaudeamus Igitur" — Joy must contain edi-
fying and healing forces for the moral nature of
man. Otherwise, how comes it that our soul, as
soon as it basks in the sunshine of joy, uncon-
sciously vows to itself, " I will be good ! " " I will
become perfect ! " and is at once seized by a pre-
monition of perfection that is like a shudder of re-
ligious awe ?

340.
To One who is Praised. — So long as you are
praised, believe that you are not yet on your own
course but on that of another.

VOL. II. L



1 62 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

341.

Loving the Master. — The apprentice and the
master love the master in different ways.

342.

All-too-Beautiful and Human.— "Nature
is too beautiful for thee, poor mortal," one often
feels. But now and then, at a profound contem-
plation of all that is human, in its fulness, vigour,
tenderness, and complexity, I have felt as if I must
say, in all humility, " Man also is too beautiful for
the contemplation of man ! " Nor did I mean the
moral man alone, but every one.

343-
Real and' Personal Estate. — When life has
treated us in true robber fashion, and has taken
away all that it could of honour, joys, connections,
health, and property of every kind, we perhaps dis-
cover in the end, after the first shock, that we are
richer than before. For now we know for the first
time what is so peculiarly ours that no robber hand
can touch it, and perhaps, after all the plunder and
devastation, we come forward with the airs of a
mighty real estate owner.

344-

Involuntarily Idealised. — The most painful

feeling that exists is finding out that we are always

taken for something higher than we really are. For

we must thereby confess to ourselves, " There is in



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 63

you some element of fraud — your speech, your ex-
pression, your bearing, your eye, your dealings ;
and this deceitful something is as necessary as your
usual honesty, but constantly destroys its effect and
its value.

345.
Idealist and Liar. — We must not let ourselves
be tyrannised even by that finest faculty of idealising
things : otherwise, truth will one day part company
from us with the insulting remark : " Thou arch-liar,
what have I to do with thee ? "

346.

Being Misunderstood. — When one is mis-
understood generally, it is impossible to remove a
particular misunderstanding. This point must be
recognised, to save superfluous expenditure of energy
in self-defence.

347.

The Water-Drinker Speaks. — Go on drink-
ing your wine, which has refreshed you all your life
— what affair is it of yours if I have to be a water-
drinker? Are not wine and water peaceable,
brotherly elements, that can live side by side with-
out mutual recriminations?

348.

From Cannibal Country. — In solitude the
lonely man is eaten up by himself, among crowds
by the many. Choose which you prefer.



164 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

349-

The Freezing-Point of the Will. — " Some
time the hour will come at last, the hour that will
envelop you in the golden cloud of painlessness ;
when the soul enjoys its own weariness and, happy
in patient playing with patience, resembles the waves
of a lake, which on a quiet summer day, in the re-
flection of a many-hued evening sky, sip and sip at
the shore and again are hushed — without end, with-
out purpose, without satiety, without need — all calm
rejoicing in change, all ebb and flow of Nature's
pulse." Such is the feeling and talk of all invalids,
but if they attain that hour, a brief period of enjoy-
ment is followed by ennui. But this is the thawing-
wind of the frozen will, which awakes, stirs, and once
more begets desire upon desire. — Desire is a sign of
convalescence or recovery.

350.
The Disclaimed Ideal. — It happens some-
times by an exception that a man only reaches the
highest when he disclaims his ideal. For this ideal
previously drove him onward too violently, so that
in the middle of the track he regularly got out of
breath and had to rest.

3Si.
A Treacherous Inclination. — It should be
regarded as a sign of an envious but aspiring man,
when he feels himself attracted by the thought that
with regard to the eminent there is but one salvation
— love.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. \6$
352.

Staircase Happiness. — Just as the wit of many
men does not keep pace with opportunity (so that
opportunity has already passed through the door
while wit still waits on the staircase outside), so
others have a kind of staircase happiness, which
walks too slowly to keep pace with swift-footed
Time. The best that it can enjoy of an experience,
of a whole span of life, falls to its share long after-
wards, often only as a weak, spicy fragrance, giving
rise to longing and sadness — as if " it might have
been possible " — some time or other — to drink one's
fill of this element : but now it is too late.

353-
Worms. — The fact that an intellect contains a
few worms does not detract from its ripeness.

354-

The Seat of Victory. — A good seat on horse-
back robs an opponent of his courage, the spectator
of his heart — why attack such a man ? Sit like one
who has been victorious !



355.

Danger in Admiration. — From excessive ad-
miration for the virtues of others one can lose the
sense of one's own, and finally, through lack of prac-
tice, lose these virtues themselves, without retaining
the alien virtues as compensation.






1 66 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Uses of Sickliness. — He who is often ill not
only has a far greater pleasure in health, on account
of his so often getting well, but acquires a very keen
sense of what is healthy or sickly in actions and
achievements, both his own and others'. Thus, for
example, it is just the writers of uncertain health —
among whom, unfortunately, nearly all great writers
must be classed — who are wont to have a far more
even and assured tone of health in their writings,
because they are better versed than are the physi-
cally robust in the philosophy of psychical health
and convalescence and in their teachers — morning,
sunshine, forest, and fountain.

357.
Disloyalty a Condition of Mastery. — It
cannot be helped — every master has but one pupil,
and he becomes disloyal to him, for he also is des-
tined for mastery.

358.

Never IN Vain. — In the mountains of truth you
never climb in vain. Either you already reach a
higher point to-day, or you exercise your strength
in order to be able to climb higher to-morrow.

359-
Through Grey Window-Panes. — Is what you
see through this window of the world so beautiful
that you do not wish to look through any other



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 67

window — ay, and even try to prevent others from
so doing ?

360.
A Sign of Radical Changes. — When we
dream of persons long forgotten or dead, it is a
sign that we have suffered radical changes, and
that the soil on which we live has been completely
undermined. The dead rise again, and our antiquity
becomes modernity.

361.

Medicine of the Soul. — To lie still and think
little is the cheapest medicine for all diseases of
the soul, and, with the aid of good-will, becomes
pleasanter every hour that it is used.

362.

Intellectual Order of Precedence. — You
rank far below others when you try to establish the
exception and they the rule.

363.
The Fatalist. — You must believe in fate —
science can compel you thereto. All that develops
in you out of that belief — cowardice, devotion or
loftiness, and uprightness — bears witness to the soil
in which the grain was sown, but not to the grain
itself, for from that seed anything and everything
can grow.

364.
The Reason for Much Fretfulness. — He
that prefers the beautiful to the useful in life will



1 68 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

undoubtedly, like children who prefer sweetmeats
to bread, destroy his digestion and acquire a very
fretful outlook on the world.



365.

Excess as a Remedy. — We can make our own
talent once more acceptable to ourselves by hon-
ouring and enjoying the opposite talent for some
time to excess. — Using excess as a remedy is one
of the more refined devices in the art of life.

366.

" Will a Self." — Active, successful natures act,
not according to the maxim, " Know thyself," but
as if always confronted with the command, " Will
a self, so you will become a self." — Fate seems
always to have left them a choice. Inactive, con-
templative natures, on the other hand, reflect on
how they have chosen their self " once for all " at
their entry into life.

367.

To Live as Far as Possible without a
Following. — How small is the importance of
followers we first grasp when we have ceased to be
the followers of our followers.

368.

Obscuring Oneself. — We must understand
how to obscure ourselves in order to get rid of the
gnat-swarms of pestering admirers.






MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 169

369.

Ennui. — There is an ennui of the most subtle
and cultured brains, to which the best that the
world can offer has become stale. Accustomed to
eat ever more and more recherche fare and to feel
disgust at coarser diet, they are in danger of dying
of hunger. For the very best exists but in small
quantities, and has sometimes become inaccessible
or hard as stone, so that even good teeth can no
longer bite it.

370.

The Danger in Admiration. — The admira-
tion of a quality or of an art may be so strong as to
deter us from aspiring to possess that quality or art.

371.

What is Required of Art. — One man wants
to enjoy himself by means of art, another for a time
to get out of or #bove himself. — To meet both re-
quirements there exists a twofold species of artists.

372.

Secessions. — Whoever secedes from us offends
not us, perhaps, but certainly our adherents.

373.

After Death. — It is only long after the death

of a man that we find it inconceivable that he should

be missed — in the case of really great men, only after

decades. Those who are honest usually think when



170 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

any one dies that he is not much missed, and that
the pompous funeral oration is a piece of hypocrisy.
Necessity first teaches the necessariness of an in-
dividual, and the proper epitaph is a belated sigh.

374-

Leaving in Hades. — We must leave many
things in the Hades of half-conscious feeling, and
not try to release them from their shadow-existence,
or else they will become, as thoughts and words, our
demoniacal tyrants, with cruel lust after our blood.

375-

Near to Beggary. — Even the richest intellect
sometimes mislays the key to the room in which his
hoarded treasures repose. He is then like the poorest
of the poor, who must beg to get a living.

376.

Chain-Thinkers.— To him who has thought a
great deal, every new thought that he hears or reads
at once assumes the form of a chain.

377.
Pity. — In the gilded sheath of pity is sometimes
hidden the dagger of envy.

378.

What is Genius ? — To aspire to a lofty aim and
to will the means to that aim.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 171
379-

Vanity of Combatants. — He who has no hope
of victory in a combat, or who is obviously worsted,
is all the more desirous that his style of fighting
should be admired.

380.

The Philosophic Life Misinterpreted. — At
the moment when one is beginning to take philo-
sophy seriously, the whole world fancies that one is
doing the reverse.

381.

Imitation. — By imitation, the bad gains, the
good loses credit — especially in art.

382.

Final Teaching of History.—" Oh that I had
but lived in those times ! " is the exclamation of
foolish and frivolous men. At every period of
history that we seriously review, even if it be the
most belauded era of the past, we shall rather cry
out at the end, " Anything but a return to that !
The spirit of that age would oppress you with the
weight of a hundred atmospheres, the good and
beautiful in it you would not enjoy, its evil you
could not digest." Depend upon it, posterity will
pass the same verdict on our own epoch, and say
that it was unbearable, that life under such condi-
tions was intolerable. "And yet every one can
endure his own times ? " Yes, because the spirit of



172 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

his age not only lies upon him but is in him. The
spirit of the age offers resistance to itself and can
bear itself.

383.

Greatness as a Mask. — By greatness in our
comportment we embitter our foes ; by envy that we
do not conceal we almost reconcile them to us. For
envy levels and makes equal ; it is an unconscious,
plaintive variety of modesty. — It may be indeed that
here and there, for the sake of the above-named
advantage, envy has been assumed as a mask by
those who are not envious. Certainly, however,
greatness in comportment is often used as the mask
of envy by ambitious men who would rather suffer
drawbacks and embitter their foes than let it be seen
that they place them on an equal footing with them-
selves.

384.

Unpardonable. — You gave him an opportunity
of displaying the greatness of his character, and he
did not make use of the opportunity. He will never
forgive you for that.

385.

Contrasts. — The most senile thought ever con-
ceived about men lies in the famous saying, " The
ego is always hateful," the most childish in the still
more famous saying, " Love thy neighbour as thy-
self." — With the one knowledge of men has ceased,
with the other it has not yet begun.



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 73
386.

A Defective Ear. — " We still belong to the
mob so long as we always shift the blame on to
others; we are on the track of wisdom when we
always make ourselves alone responsible; but the
wise man finds no one to blame, neither himself nor
others." — Who said that ? Epictetus, eighteen hun-
dred years ago. — The world has heard but forgotten
the saying. — No, the world has not heard and not
forgotten it: everything is not forgotten. But we
had not the necessary ear, the ear of Epictetus. —
So he whispered it into his own ear ? — Even so : wis-
dom is the whispering of the sage to himself in the
crowded market-place.

387.
A Defect of Standpoint, not of Vision —
We always stand a few paces too near ourselves
and a few paces too far from our neighbour. Hence
we judge him too much in the lump, and ourselves
too much by individual, occasional, insignificant
features and circumstances.

388.

Ignorance about Weapons. — How little we
care whether another knows a subject or not ! —
whereas he perhaps sweats blood at the bare idea
that he may be considered ignorant on the point.
Yes, there are exquisite fools, who always go about
with a quiverful of mighty, excommunicatory utter-
ances, ready to shoot down any one who shows
freely that there are matters in which their judg-
ment is not taken into acccount.



174 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

389.

At the Drinking-Table of Experience.—
People whose innate moderation leads them to
drink but the half of every glass, will not admit
that everything in the world has its lees and sedi-
ment.

390.

Singing-Birds.— The followers of a great man
often put their own eyes out, so that they may be
the better able to sing his praise.

391.
Beyond our Ken.— The good generally dis-
pleases us when it is beyond our ken.

392.
Rule as Mother or as Child.— There is one
condition that gives birth to rules, another to which
rules give birth.

393-
Comedy. — We sometimes earn honour or love
for actions and achievements which we have long
since sloughed as the snake sloughs his skin. We
are hereby easily seduced into becoming the comic
actors of our own past, and into throwing the old
skin once more about our shoulders — and that not
merely from vanity, but from good-will towards our
admirers.

394-
A Mistake of Biographers. — The small force
that is required to launch a boat into the stream



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 75

must not be confounded with the force of the
stream that carries the boat along. Yet this mis-
take is made in nearly all biographies.

395-
Not Buying too Dear. — The things that we
buy too dear we generally turn to bad use, because
we have no love for them but only a painful recol-
lection. Thus they involve a twofold drawback.

39^.
The Philosophy that Society always
Needs. — The pillars of the social structure rest
upon the fundamental fact that every one cheer-
fully contemplates all that he is, does, and attempts,
his sickness or health, his poverty or affluence, his
honour or insignificance, and says to himself,
"After all, I would not change places with any
one ! " — Whoever wishes to add a stone to the
social structure should always try to implant in
mankind this cheerful philosophy of contentment
and refusal to change places.

397.

The Mark of a Noble Soul. — A noble soul

is not that which is capable of the highest flights,

but that which rises little and falls little, living

always in a free and bright atmosphere and altitude

398.
Greatness and its Contemplator. — The
noblest effect of greatness is that it gives the con-



176 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






templator a power of vision that magnifies and em-
bellishes.

399-
Being Satisfied. — We show that we have
attained maturity of understanding when we no
longer go where rare flowers lurk under the thorniest
hedges of knowledge, but are satisfied with gardens,
forests, meadows, and ploughlands, remembering
that life is too short for the rare and uncommon.

400.

Advantage in Privation. — He who always
lives in the warmth and fulness of the heart, and,
as it were, in the summer air of the soul, cannot form
an idea of that fearful delight which seizes more
wintry natures, who for once in a way are kissed
by the rays of love and the milder breath of a
sunny February day.

401.

Recipe for the Sufferer. — You find the
burden of life too heavy ? Then you must increase
the burden of your life. When the sufferer finally
thirsts after and seeks the river of Lethe, then he
must become a hero to be certain of finding it.

402.

The Judge. — He who has seen another's ideal
becomes his inexorable judge, and as it were his
evil conscience.

403.

The Utility of Great Renunciation.— The
useful thing about great renunciation is that it in-



MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS. 1 77

vests us with that youthful pride through which we
can thenceforth easily demand of ourselves small
renunciations.

404.

How Duty Acquires a Glamour.— You can
change a brazen duty into gold in the eyes of all
by always performing something more than you
have promised.

405.

Prayer to Mankind. — "Forgive us our virtues"
' — so should we pray to mankind.

406.

They that Create and They that Enjoy.
— Every one who enjoys thinks that the principal
thing to the tree is the fruit, but in point of fact
the principal thing to it is the seed. — Herein lies
the difference between them that create and them
that enjoy.

407.

The Glory of all Great Men.— What is the
use of genius if it does not invest him who contem-
plates and reveres it with such freedom and lofti-
ness of feeling that he no longer has need of genius ?
— To make themselves superfluous is the glory of
all great men.

408.

The Journey to Hades. — I too have been in
the underworld, even as Odysseus, and I shall often
be there again. Not sheep alone have I sacrificed,
vol. 11. M



178 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that I might be able to converse with a few dead
souls, but not even my own blood have I spared.
There were four pairs who responded to me in my
sacrifice : Epicurus and Montaigne, Goethe and
Spinoza, Plato and Rousseau, Pascal and Schopen-
hauer. With them I have to come to terms. When
I have long wandered alone, I will let them prove
me right or wrong ; to them will I listen, if they
prove each other right or wrong. In all that I say,
conclude, or think out for myself and others, I
fasten my eyes on those eight and see their eyes
fastened on mine. — May the living forgive me if I
look upon them at times as shadows, so pale and
fretful, so restless and, alas ! so eager for life. Those
eight, on the other hand, seem to me so living that
I feel as if even now, after their death, they could
never become weary of life. But eternal vigour of
life is the important point : what matters " eternal
life," or indeed life at all ?









PART II.
THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW.

The Shadow. It is so long since I heard you
speak that I should like to give you an opportunity
of talking.

The Wanderer : I hear a voice — where ? whose ?
I almost fancied that 1 heard myself speaking, but
with a voice yet weaker than my own.

The Shadow (after a pause) : Are you not glad
to have an opportunity of speaking ?

The Wanderer : By God and everything else in
which 1 disbelieve, it is my shadow that speaks. I
hear it, but I do not believe it.

The Shadow : Let us assume that it exists, and
think no more about it. In another hour all will be
over.

The Wanderer: That is just what I thought
when in a forest near Pisa I saw first two and then
five camels.

The Shadow. It is all the better if we are both
equally forbearing towards each other when for once
our reason is silent. Thus we shall avoid losing our
tempers in conversation, and shall not at once apply
mutual thumb-screws in the event of any word
sounding for once unintelligible to us. If one does
not know exactly how to answer, it is enough to



1 82 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






say something. Those are the reasonable terms on
which I hold conversation with any person. During
a long talk the wisest of men becomes a fool once
and a simpleton thrice.

The Wanderer-. Your moderation is not flatter-
ing to those to whom you confess it.

The Shadow. Am I, then, to flatter?

The Wanderer-. I thought a man's shadow was
his vanity. Surely vanity would never say, " Am
I, then, to flatter ? "

The Shadow : Nor does human vanity, so far as
I am acquainted with it, ask, as I have done twice,
whether it may speak. It simply speaks.

The Wanderer: Now I see for the first time how
rude I am to you, my beloved shadow. I have not
said a word of my supreme delight in hearing and
not merely seeing you. You must know that I love
shadows even as I love light. For the existence of
beauty of face, clearness of speech, kindliness and
firmness of character, the shadow is as necessary
as the light. They are not opponents — rather do
they hold each other's hands like good friends ; and
when the light vanishes, the shadow glides after it

The Shadow: Yes, and I hate the same thing
that you hate — night. I love men because they are
votaries of life. I rejoice in the gleam of their eyes
when they recognise and discover, they who never
weary of recognising and discovering. That
shadow which all things cast when the sunshine
of knowledge falls upon them — that shadow too
am I.

The Wanderer: I think I understand you, al-
though you have expressed yourself in somewhat



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 83

shadowy terms. You are right. Good friends give
to each other here and there, as a sign of mutual
understanding, an obscure phrase which to any third
party is meant to be a riddle. And we are good
friends, you and I. So enough of preambles! Some
few hundred questions oppress my soul, and the time
for you to answer them is perchance but short. Let
us see how we may come to an understanding as
quickly and peaceably as possible.

The Shadow. But shadows are more shy than
men. You will not reveal to any man the manner
of our conversation ?

The Wanderer : The manner of our conversation ?
Heaven preserve me from wire-drawn, literary dia-
logues ! If Plato had found less pleasure in spin-
ning them out, his readers would have found more
pleasure in Plato. A dialogue that in real life is
a source of delight, when turned into writing and
read, is a picture with nothing but false perspectives.
Everything is too long or too short. — Yet perhaps
I may reveal the points on which we have come to
an understanding ?

The Shadow. With that I am content. For
every one will only recognise your views once more,
and no one will think of the shadow.

The Wanderer-. Perhaps you are wrong, my
friend ! Hitherto they have observed in my views
more of the shadow than of me.

The Shadow : More of the shadow than of the
light ? Is that possible ?

The Wanderer : Be serious, dear fool ! My very
first question demands seriousness.



1 84 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



I.

Of the Tree of Knowledge. — Probability,
but no truth ; the semblance of freedom, but no free-
dom — these are the two fruits by virtue of which the
tree of knowledge cannot be confounded with the
tree of life.



The World's Reason.— That the world is not
the abstract essence of an eternal reasonableness is
sufficiently proved by the fact that that bit of the
world which we know — I mean our human reason —
is none too reasonable. And if this is not eternally
and wholly wise and reasonable, the rest of the world
will not be so either. Here the conclusion a minori
ad majus, a parte ad totum holds good, and that
with decisive force.

3-
"In the Beginning was." — To glorify the
origin — that is the metaphysical after-shoot which
sprouts again at the contemplation of history, and
absolutely makes us imagine that in the beginning of
things lies all that is most valuable and essential.

4-
Standard for the Value of Truth.— The
difficulty of climbing mountains is no gauge of their
height. Yet in the case of science it is different ! —
we are told by certain persons who wish to be con-
sidered "the initiated," — the difficulty in finding



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 85

truth is to determine the value of truth ! This in-
sane morality originates in the idea that " truths " are
really nothing more than gymnastic appliances, with
which we have to exercise ourselves until we are
thoroughly tired. It is a morality for the athletes
and gymnasts of the intellect.



5.

Use of Words and Reality. — There exists
a simulated contempt for all the things that man-
kind actually holds most important, for all everyday
matters. For instance, we say "we only eat to live"
— an abominable lie, like that which speaks of the
procreation of children as the real purpose of all
sexual pleasure. Conversely, the reverence for " the
most important things " is hardly ever quite genuine.
The priests and metaphysicians have indeed accus-
tomed us to a hypocritically exaggerated use of
words regarding these matters, but they have not
altered the feeling that these most important things
are not so important as those despised " everyday
matters." A fatal consequence of this twofold hypo-
crisy is that we never make these everyday matters
(such as eating, housing, clothes, and intercourse)
the object of a constant unprejudiced and universal
reflection and revision, but, as such a process appears
degrading, we divert from them our serious intel-
lectual and artistic side. Hence in such matters
habit and frivolity win an easy victory over the
thoughtless, especially over inexperienced youth.
On theother hand, our continual transgressions of the
simplest laws of body and mind reduce us all, young



1 86 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and old, to a disgraceful state of dependence and
servitude — I mean to that fundamentally super-
fluous dependence upon physicians, teachers and
clergymen, whose dead-weight still lies heavy upon
the whole of society.



6.

Earthly Infirmities and their Main Cause.
— If we look about us, we are always coming across
men who have eaten eggs all their lives without ob-
serving that the oblong-shaped taste the best; whodo
not know that a thunder-storm is beneficial to the
stomach ; that perfumes are most fragrant in cold,
clear air ; that our sense of taste varies in different
parts of our mouths ; that every meal at which we
talk well or listen well does harm to the digestion.
If we are not satisfied with these examples of de-
fective powers of observation, we shall concede all
the more readily that the everyday matters are
very imperfectly seen and rarely observed by the
majority. Is this a matter of indifference ? — Let us
remember, after all, that from this defect are derived
nearly all the bodily and spiritual infirmities of the
individual. Ignorance of what is good and bad for
us, in the arrangement of our mode of life, the division
of our day, the selection of our friends and the time
we devote to them, in business and leisure, com-
manding and obeying, our feeling for nature and for
art, our eating, sleeping, and meditation ; ignorance
and lack of keen perceptions in the smallest and most
ordinary details — this it is that makes the world " a
vale of tears " for so many. Let us not say that here






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 87

as everywhere the fault lies with human unreason.
Of reason there is enough and to spare, but it is
wrongly directed and artificially diverted from these
little intimate things. Priests and teachers, and the
sublime ambition of all idealists, coarser and subtler,
din it even into the child's ears that the means of
serving mankind at large depend upon altogether
different things — upon the salvation of the soul, the
service of the State, the advancement of science, or
even upon social position and property ; whereas the
needs of the individual, his requirements great and
small during the twenty-four hours of the day, are
quite paltry or indifferent. — Even Socrates attacked
with all his might this arrogant neglect of the human
for the benefit of humanity, and loved to indicate by
a quotation from Homer the true sphere and con-
ception of all anxiety and reflection: " All that really
matters," he said, " is the good and evil hap I find
at home."



Two Means of Consolation. — Epicurus, the
soul-comforter of later antiquity, said, with that mar-
vellous insight which to this very day is so rarely to
be found, that for the calming of the spirit the solu-
tion of the final and ultimate theoretical problems is
by no means necessary. Hence, instead of raising a
barren and remote discussion of the final question,
whether the Gods existed, it sufficed him to say to
those who were tormented by " fear of the Gods " :
" If there are Gods, they do not concern themselves
with us." The latter position is far stronger and



1 88 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

more favourable, for, by conceding a few points to the
other, one makes him readier to listen and to take
to heart. But as soon as he sets about proving the
opposite (that the Gods do concern themselves with
us), into what thorny jungles of error must the poor
man fall, quite of his own accord, and without any
cunning on the part of his interlocutor ! The latter
must only have enough subtlety and humanity to
conceal his sympathy with this tragedy. Finally, the
other comes to feel disgust — the strongest argument
against any proposition — disgust with his own hypo-
thesis. He becomes cold, and goes away in the same
frame of mind as the pure atheist who says, " What
do the Gods matter to me ? The devil take them ! " —
In other cases, especially when a half-physical, half-
moral assumption had cast a gloom over his spirit,
Epicurus did not refute the assumption. He agreed
that it might be true, but that there was a second
assumption to explain the same phenomenon, and
that it could perhaps be maintained in other ways.
The plurality of hypotheses (for example, that con-
cerning the origin of conscientious scruples) suffices
even in our time to remove from the soul the shadows
that arise so easily from pondering over a hypothesis
which is isolated, merely visible, and hence overvalued
a hundredfold. — Thus whoever wishes to console the
unfortunate, the criminal, the hypochondriac, the
dying, may call to mind the two soothing suggestions
of Epicurus, which can be applied to a great number
of problems. In their simplest form they would run :
firstly, granted the thing is so, it does not concern
us ; secondly, the thing may be so, but it may also
be otherwise.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 89
8.

In the Night. — So soon as night begins to fall
our sensations concerning everyday matters are
altered. There is the wind, prowling as if on for-
bidden paths, whispering as if in search of some-
thing, fretting because he cannot find it. There is
the lamplight, with its dim red glow, its weary look,
unwillingly fighting against night, a sullen slave to
wakeful man. There are the breathings of the sleeper,
with their terrible rhythm, to which an ever-recur-
ring care seems to blow the trumpet-melody — we do
not hear it, but when the sleeper's bosom heaves we
feel our heart-strings tighten ; and when the breath
sinks and almost dies away into a deathly stillness,
we say to ourselves, " Rest awhile, poor troubled
spirit ! " All living creatures bear so great a burden
that we wish them an eternal rest ; night invites to
death. — If human beings were deprived of the sun
and resisted night by means of moonlight and oil-
lamps, what a philosophy would cast its veil over
them ! We already see only too plainly how a
shadow is thrown over the spiritual and intellectual
nature of man by that moiety of darkness and sun-
lessness that envelops life.



9-

Origin of the Doctrine of Free Will. —
Necessity sways one man in the shape of his pas-
sions, another as a habit of hearing and obeying, a
third as a logical conscience, a fourth as a caprice
and a mischievous delight in evasions. These four,



igo HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

however, seek the freedom of their will at the very
point where they are most securely fettered. It is
as if the silkworm sought freedom of will in spinning.
What is the reason ? Clearly this, that every one
thinks himself most free where his vitality is strong-
est ; hence, as I have said, now in passion, now in
duty, now in knowledge, now in caprice. A man un-
consciously imagines that where he is strong, where
he feels most thoroughly alive, the element of his
freedom must lie. He thinks of dependence and
apathy, independence and vivacity as forming in-
evitable pairs. — Thus an experience that a man
has undergone in the social and political sphere is
wrongly transferred to the ultimate metaphysical
sphere. There the strong man is also the free man,
there the vivid feeling of joy and sorrow, the high
hopes, the keen desires, the powerful hates are the
attributes of the ruling, independent natures, while
the thrall and the slave live in a state of dazed
oppression. — The doctrine of free will is an invention
of the ruling classes.

10.

Absence of Feeling of New Chains. — So
long as we do not feel that we are in some way de-
pendent, we consider ourselves independent — a false
conclusion that shows how proud man is, how eager
for dominion. For he hereby assumes that he would
always be sure to observe and recognise dependence
so soon as he suffered it, the preliminary hypothesis
being that he generally lives in independence, and
that, should he lose that independence for once in a
way, he would immediately detect a contrary sensa-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 19I

tion. — Suppose, however, the reverse to be true —
that he is always living in a complex state of depend-
ence, but thinks himself free where, through long
habit, he no longer feels the weight of the chain ?
He only suffers from new chains, and " free will "
really means nothing more than an absence of feel-
ing of new chains.

11.

Freedom of the Will and the Isolation of
Facts. — Our ordinary inaccurate observation takes
a group of phenomena as one and calls them a fact.
Between this fact and another we imagine a vacuum,
we isolate each fact. In reality, however, the sum
of our actions and cognitions is no series of facts
and intervening vacua, but a continuous stream.
Now the belief in free will is incompatible with the
idea of a continuous, uniform, undivided, indivisible
flow. This belief presupposes that every single
action is isolated and indivisible; it is an atomic
theory as regards volition and cognition. — We mis-
understand facts as we misunderstand characters,
speaking of similar characters and similar facts,
whereas both are non-existent. Further, we bestow
praise and blame only on this false hypothesis, that
there are similar facts, that a graduated order of
species of facts exists, corresponding to a graduated
order of values. Thus we isolate not only the single
fact, but the groups of apparently equal facts (good,
evil, compassionate, envious actions, and so forth).
In both cases we are wrong. — The word and the
concept are the most obvious reason for our belief
in this isolation of groups of actions. We do not



192 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






merely thereby designate the things ; the thought at
the back of our minds is that by the word and the
concept we can grasp the essence of the actions.
We are still constantly led astray by words and
actions, and are induced to think of things as simpler
than they are, as separate, indivisible, existing in
the absolute. Language contains a hidden philo-
sophical mythology, which, however careful we may
be, breaks out afresh at every moment. The belief
in free will — that is to say, in similar facts and iso-
lated facts — finds in language its continual apostle
and advocate.

12.

The Fundamental Errors. — A man cannot
feel any psychical pleasure or pain unless he is
swayed by one of two illusions. Either he believes
in the identity of certain facts, certain sensations,
and in that case finds spiritual pleasure and pain
in comparing present with past conditions and in
noting their similarity or difference (as is invariably
the case with recollection) ; or he believes in the
freedom of the will, perhaps when he reflects, " I
ought not to have done this," "This might have
turned out differently," and from these reflections
likewise he derives pleasure and pain. Without
the errors that are rife in every psychical pain and
pleasure, humanity would never have developed.
For the root idea of humanity is that man is free in a
world of bondage — man, the eternal wonder-worker,
whether his deeds be good or evil — man, the amaz-
ing exception, the super-beast, the quasi-God, the
mind of creation, the indispensable, the key-word



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 93

to the cosmic riddle, the mighty lord of nature and
despiser of nature, the creature that calls its history
" the history of the world " ! Vanitas vanitatum
homo.

13-
Repetition. — It is an excellent thing to express
a thing consecutively in two ways, and thus provide
it with a right and a left foot. Truth can stand
indeed on one leg, but with two she will walk and
complete her journey.

14.
Man as the Comic Actor of the World. —
It would require beings more intellectual than men
to relish to the full the humorous side of man's view
of himself as the goal of all existence and of his
serious pronouncement that he is satisfied only with
the prospect of fulfilling a world -mission. If a God
created the world, he created man to be his ape, as
a perpetual source of amusement in the midst of his
rather tedious eternities. The music of the spheres
surrounding the world would then presumably be
the mocking laughter of all the other creatures
around mankind. God in his boredom uses pain
for the tickling of his favourite animal, in order to
enjoy his proudly tragic gestures and expressions
of suffering, and, in general, the intellectual inven-
tiveness of the vainest of his creatures — as inventor
of this inventor. For he who invented man as a
joke had more intellect and more joy in intellect
than has man. — Even here, where our human nature
is willing to humble itself, our vanity again plays us
a trick, in that we men should like in this vanity at

VOL. II. N



194 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

least to be quite marvellous and incomparable. Our
uniqueness in the world ! Oh, what an improbable
thing it is ! Astronomers, who occasionally acquire
a horizon outside our world, give us to understand
that the drop of life on the earth is without signific-
ance for the total character of the mighty ocean of
birth and decay ; that countless stars present con-
ditions for the generation of life similar to those of
the earth — and yet these are but a handful in com-
parison with the endless number that have never
known, or have long been cured, of the eruption of
life; that life on each of these stars, measured by
the period of its existence, has been but an instant,
a flicker, with long, long intervals afterwards — and
thus in no way the aim and final purpose of their
existence. Possibly the ant in the forest is quite
as firmly convinced that it is the aim and purpose
of the existence of the forest, as we are convinced
in our imaginations (almost unconsciously) that the
destruction of mankind involves the destruction of
the world. It is even modesty on our part to go
no farther than this, and not to arrange a universal
twilight of the world and the Gods as the funeral
ceremony of the last man. Even to the eye of
the most unbiassed astronomer a lifeless world can
scarcely appear otherwise than as a shining and
swinging star wherein man lies buried.



15.
The Modesty of Man.— How little pleasure is
enough for the majority to make them feel that life
is good ! How modest is man !



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 195



1 6.

Where Indifference is Necessary.— No-
thing would be more perverse than to wait for
the truths that science will finally establish con-
cerning the first and last things, and until then to
think (and especially to believe) in the traditional
way, as one is so often advised to do. The impulse
that bids us seek nothing but certainties in this
domain is a religious offshoot, nothing better — a
hidden and only apparently sceptical variety of the
" metaphysical need," the underlying idea being
that for a long time no view of these ultimate
certainties will be obtainable, and that until then
the " believer " has the right not to trouble himself
about the whole subject. We have no need of
these certainties about the farthermost horizons in
order to live a full and efficient human life, any
more than the ant needs them in order to be a good
ant. Rather must we ascertain the origin of that
troublesome significance that we have attached to
these things for so long. For this we require the
history of ethical and religious sentiments, since it
is only under the influence of such sentiments that
these most acute problems of knowledge have be-
come so weighty and terrifying. Into the outer-
most regions to which the mental eye can penetrate
(without ever penetrating into them), we have
smuggled such concepts as guilt and punishment
(everlasting punishment, too !). The darker those
regions, the more careless we have been. For ages
men have let their imaginations run riot where they



196 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

could establish nothing, and have induced posterity
to accept these fantasies as something serious and
true, with this abominable lie as their final trump-
card : that faith is worth more than knowledge.
What we need now in regard to these ultimate things
is not knowledge as against faith, but indifference
as against faith and pretended knowledge in these
matters ! — Everything must lie nearer to us than
what has hitherto been preached to us as the most
important thing, I mean the questions : " What end
does man serve ? " " What is his fate after death ? "
" How does he make his peace with God ? " and all
the rest of that bag of tricks. The problems of the
dogmatic philosophers, be they idealists, materialists,
or realists, concern us as little as do these religious
questions. They all have the same object in view
— to force us to a decision in matters where neither
faith nor knowledge is needed. It is better even
for the most ardent lover of knowledge that the
territory open to investigation and to reason should
be encircled by a belt of fog-laden, treacherous
marshland, a strip of ever watery, impenetrable, and
indeterminable country. It is just by the com-
parison with the realm of darkness on the edge of
the world of knowledge that the bright, accessible
region of that world rises in value. — We must once
more become good friends of the "everyday matters,"
and not, as hitherto, despise them and look beyond
them at clouds and monsters of the night. In forests
and caverns, in marshy tracts and under dull skies,
on the lowest rungs of the ladder of culture, man
has lived for aeons, and lived in poverty. There
he has learnt to despise the present, his neighbours,



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 97

his life, and himself, and we, the inhabitants of the
brighter fields of Nature and mind, still inherit in
our blood some taint of this contempt for everyday
matters.



17.

Profound Interpretations. — He who has in-
terpreted a passage in an author " more profoundly "
than was intended, has not interpreted the author
but has obscured him. Our metaphysicians are in
the same relation, or even in a worse relation, to the
text of Nature. For, to apply their profound in-
terpretations, they often alter the text to suit their
purpose — or, in other words, corrupt the text. A
curious example of the corruption and obscuration
of an author's text is furnished by the ideas of
Schopenhauer on the pregnancy of women. " The
sign of a continuous will to life in time," he says,
" is copulation ; the sign of the light of knowledge
which is associated anew with this will and holds
the possibility of a deliverance, and that too in the
highest degree of clearness, is the renewed incar-
nation of the will to life. This incarnation is be-
tokened by pregnancy, which is therefore frank and
open, and even proud, whereas copulation hides itself
like a criminal." He declares that every woman, if
surprised in the sexual act, would be likely to die
of shame, but "displays her pregnancy without a
trace of shame, nay even with a sort of pride." Now,
firstly, this condition cannot easily be displayed
more aggressively than it displays itself, and when



I98 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

Schopenhauer gives prominence only to the inten-
tional character of the display, he is fashioning his
text to suit the interpretation. Moreover, his state-
ment of the universality of the phenomenon is not
true. He speaks of "every woman." Many women,
especially the younger, often appear painfully
ashamed of their condition, even in the presence of
their nearest kinsfolk. And when women of riper
years, especially in the humbler classes, do actually
appear proud of their condition, it is because they
would give us to understand that they are still
desirable to their husbands. That a neighbour on
seeing them or a passing stranger should say or
think " Can it be possible ? " — that is an alms always
acceptable to the vanity of women of low mental
capacity. In the reverse instance, to conclude from
Schopenhauer's proposition, the cleverest and most
intelligent women would tend more than any to
exult openly in their condition. For they have the
best prospect of giving birth to an intellectual
prodigy, in whom " the will " can once more
"negative" itself for the universal good. Stupid
women, on the other hand, would have every reason
to hide their pregnancy more modestly than any-
thing they hide. — It cannot be said that this view
corresponds to reality. Granted, however, that
Schopenhauer was right on the general principle
that women show more self-satisfaction when preg-
nant than at any other time, a better explanation
than this lies to hand. One might imagine the
clucking of a hen even before she lays an egg, say-
ing, " Look ! look ! I shall lay an egg ! I shall lay
an egg ! M









THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 1 99
1 8.

The Modern Diogenes. — Before we look for
man, we must have found the lantern. — Will it have
to be the Cynic's lantern ?

19.

IMMORALISTS. — Moralists must now put up with
being rated as immoralists, because they dissect
morals. He, however, who would dissect must kill,
but only in order that we may know more, judge
better, live better, not in order that all the world
may dissect. Unfortunately, men still think that
every moralist in his every action must be a pattern
for others to imitate. They confound him with the
preacher of morality. The older moralists did not
dissect enough and preached too often, whence that
confusion and the unpleasant consequences for our
latter-day moralists are derived.

20.

A Caution against Confusion.— There are
moralists who treat the strong, noble, self-denying
attitude of such beings as the heroes of Plutarch,
or the pure, enlightened, warmth-giving state of soul
peculiar to truly good men and women, as difficult
scientific problems. They investigate the origin of
such phenomena, indicating the complex element
in the apparent simplicity, and directing their gaze
to the tangled skein of motives, the delicate web of
conceptual illusions, and the sentiments of indi-
viduals or of groups, that are a legacy of ancient



200 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

days gradually increased. Such moralists are very
different from those with whom they are most
commonly confounded, from those petty minds that
do not believe at all in these modes of thought and
states of soul, and imagine their own poverty to be
hidden somewhere behind the glamour of greatness
and purity. The moralists say, " Here are problems,"
and these pitiable creatures say, " Here are impostors
and deceptions." Thus the latter deny the existence
of the very things which the former are at pains to
explain.

21.

Man as the Measurer.— Perhaps all human
morality had its origin in the tremendous excite-
ment that seized primitive man when he discovered
measure and measuring, scales and weighing (for
the word Mensch [man] means " the measurer " — he
wished to name himself after his greatest discovery!).
With these ideas they mounted into regions that
are quite beyond all measuring and weighing, but
did not appear to be so in the beginning.



22.

The Principle of Equilibrium. — The robber
and the man of power who promises to protect a
community from robbers are perhaps at bottom
beings of the same mould, save that the latter
attains his ends by other means than the former —
that is to say, through regular imposts paid to him
by the community, and no longer through forced
contributions. (The same relation exists between






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 201

merchant and pirate, who for a long period are one
and the same person : where the one function ap-
pears to them inadvisable, they exercise the other.
Even to-day mercantile morality is really nothing
but a refinement on piratical morality — buying in
the cheapest market, at prime cost if possible, and
selling in the dearest.) The essential point is that
the man of power promises to maintain the equili-
brium against the robber, and herein the weak find
a possibility of living. For either they must group
themselves into an equivalent power, or they must
subject themselves to some one of equivalent power
{i.e. render service in return for his efforts). The
latter course is generally preferred, because it really
keeps two dangerous beings in check — the robber
through the man of power, and the man of power
through the standpoint of advantage ; for the latter
profits by treating his subjects with graciousness
and tolerance, in order that they may support not
only themselves but their ruler. As a matter of
fact, conditions may still be hard and cruel enough,
yet in comparison with the complete annihilation
that was formerly always a possibility, men breathe
freely. — The community is at first the organisa-
tion of the weak to counterbalance menacing forces.
An organisation to outweigh those forces would be
more advisable, if its members grew strong enough
to destroy the adverse power: and when it is a
question of one mighty oppressor, the attempt will
certainly be made. But if the one man is the head
of a clan, or if he has a large following, a rapid and
decisive annihilation is improbable, and a long or
permanent feud is only to be expected. This feud,



202 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

however, involves the least desirable condition for
the community, for it thereby loses the time to pro-
vide for its means of subsistence with the necessary
regularity, and sees the product of all work hourly
threatened. Hence the community prefers to raise
its power of attack and defence to the exact plane
on which the power of its dangerous neighbour
stands, and to give him to understand that an equal
weight now lies in its own side of the scales — so
why not be good friends ? — Thus equilibrium is a
most important conception for the understanding
of the ancient doctrines of law and morals. Equili-
brium is, in fact, the basis of justice. When justice
in ruder ages says, "An eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth," it presupposes the attainment of this
equilibrium and tries to maintain it by means of
this compensation ; so that, when crime is com-
mitted, the injured party will not take the revenge
of blind anger. By means of the jus talionis the
equilibrium of the disturbed relations of power is
restored, for in such primitive times an eye or an
arm more means a bit more power, more weight.
— In a community where all consider themselves
equal, disgrace and punishment await crime — that
is, violations of the principle of equilibrium. Dis-
grace is thrown into the scale as a counter-weight
against the encroaching individual, who has gained
profit by his encroachment, and now suffers losses
(through disgrace) which annul and outweigh the
previous profits. Punishment, in the same way,
sets up a far greater counter- weight against the pre-
ponderance which every criminal hopes to obtain —
imprisonment as against a deed of violence, restitu-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 203

tion and fines as against theft. Thus the sinner is
reminded that his action has excluded him from the
community and from its moral advantages, since
the community treats him as an inferior, a weaker
brother, an outsider. For this reason punishment
is not merely retaliation, but has something more,
something of the cruelty of the state of nature, and
of this it would serve as a reminder.



23.
Whether the Adherents of the Doctrine
of Free Will have a Right to Punish ? — Men
whose vocation it is to judge and punish try to
establish in every case whether an evil-doer is really
responsible for his act, whether he was able to apply
his reasoning powers, whether he acted with motives
and not unconsciously or under constraint. If he is
punished, it is because he preferred the worse to the
better motives, which he must consequently have
known. Where this knowledge is wanting, man is,
according to the prevailing view, not responsible —
unless his ignorance, e.g. his ignorantia legis, be the
consequence of an intentional neglect to learn what
he ought: in that case he already preferred the
worse to the better motives at the time when he
refused to learn, and must now pay the penalty of
his unwise choice. If, on the other hand, perhaps
through stupidity or shortsightedness, he has never
seen the better motives, he is generally not pun-
ished, for people say that he made a wrong choice,
he acted like a brute beast. The intentional rejec-
tion of the better reason is now needed before we



204 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

treat the offender as fit to be punished. But how can
any one be intentionally more unreasonable than he
ought to be ? Whence comes the decision, if the
scales are loaded with good and bad motives ? So
the origin is not error or blindness, not an internal
or external constraint? (It should furthermore be
remembered that every so-called "external con-
straint " is nothing more than the internal constraint
of fear and pain.) Whence ? is the repeated question.
So reason is not to be the cause of action, because
reason cannot decide against the better motives?
Thus we call " free will " to our aid. Absolute
discretion is to decide, and a moment is to intervene
when no motive exercises an influence, when the
deed is done as a miracle, resulting from nothing.
This assumed discretion is punished in a case
where no discretion should rule. Reason, which
knows law, prohibition, and command, should have
left no choice, they say, and should have acted
as a constraint and a higher power. Hence the
offender is punished because he makes use of " free
will " — in other words, has acted without motive
where he should have been guided by motives.
But why did he do it ? This question must not even
be asked ; the deed was done without a " Why ? "
without motive, without origin, being a thing pur-
poseless, unreasoned. — However, according to the
above-named preliminary condition of punishability,
such a deed should not be punished at all ! More-
over, even this reason for punishing should not
hold good, that in this case something had not been
done, had been omitted, that reason had not been
used at all : for at any rate the omission was unin-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 205

tentional,and only intentional omission is considered
punishable. The offender has indeed preferred the
worse to the better motives, but without motive and
purpose : he has indeed failed to apply his reason,
but not exactly with the object of not applying it.
The very assumption made in the case of punish-
able crime, that the criminal intentionally renounced
his reason, is removed by the hypothesis of " free
will." According to your own principles, you must
not punish, you adherents of the doctrine of free
will ! — These principles are, however, nothing but a
very marvellous conceptual mythology, and the hen
that hatched them has brooded on her eggs far away
from all reality.

24.
Judging the Criminal and his Judge. — The
criminal, who knows the whole concatenation of
circumstances, does not consider his act so far
beyond the bounds of order and comprehension
as does his judge. His punishment, however, is
measured by the degree of astonishment that seizes
the judge when he finds the crime incomprehensible.
— If the defending counsel's knowledge of the case
and its previous history extends far enough, the
so-called extenuating circumstances which he duly
pleads must end by absolving his client from all
guilt. Or, to put it more plainly, the advocate
will, step by step, tone down and finally remove
the astonishment of the judge, by forcing every
honest listener to the tacit avowal, " He was bound
to act as he did, and if we punished, we should
be punishing eternal Necessity." — Measuring the



2C6 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

punishment by the degree of knowledge we possess
or can obtain of the previous history of the crime — -
is that not in conflict with all equity ?

25-

Exchange and Equity. — In an exchange, the
only just and honest course would be for either
party to demand only so much as he considers his
commodity to be worth, allowance being made for
trouble in acquisition, scarcity, time spent and so
forth, besides the subjective value. As soon as
you make your price bear a relation to the other's
need, you become a refined sort of robber and ex-
tortioner. — If money is the sole medium of ex-
change, we must remember that a shilling is by
no means the same thing in the hands of a rich
heir, a farm labourer, a merchant, and a university
student. It would be equitable for every one to
receive much or little for his money, according as
he has done much or little to earn it. In practice,
as we all know, the reverse is the case. In the
world of high finance the shilling of the idle rich
man can buy more than that of the poor, industrious
man.

26.

Legal Conditions as Means. — Law, where it
rests upon contracts between equals, holds good
so long as the power of the parties to the contract
remains equal or similar. Wisdom created law
to end all feuds and useless expenditure among
men on an equal footing. Quite as definite an end
is put to this waste, however, when one party has



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 207

become decidedly weaker than the other. Subjec-
tion enters and law ceases, but the result is the
same as that attained by law. For now it is the
wisdom of the superior which advises to spare the
inferior and not uselessly to squander his strength.
Thus the position of the inferior is often more fav-
ourable than that of the equal. — Hence legal con-
ditions are temporary means counselled by wisdom,
and not ends.

27.

Explanation of Malicious Joy.— Malicious
joy arises when a man consciously finds himself
in evil plight and feels anxiety or remorse or pain.
The misfortune that overtakes B. makes him equal
to A., and A. is reconciled and no longer envious.
— If A. is prosperous, he still hoards up in his
memory B.'s misfortune as a capital, so as to throw
it in the scale as a counter-weight when he him-
self suffers adversity. In this case too he feels
" malicious joy " {Schadenfreude). The sentiment
of equality thus applies its standard to the domain
of luck and chance. Malicious joy is the commonest
expression of victory and restoration of equality,
even in a higher state of civilisation. This emotion
has only been in existence since the time when
man learnt to look upon another as his equal — in
other words, since the foundation of society.

28.

The Arbitrary Element in the Award of
Punishment. — To most criminals punishment



208 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

comes just as illegitimate children come to women.
They have done the same thing a hundred times
without any bad consequences. Suddenly comes
discovery, and with discovery punishment. Yet
habit should make the deed for which the
criminal is punished appear more excusable, for he
has developed a propensity that is hard to resist.
Instead of this, the criminal is punished more
severely if the suspicion of habitual crime rests on
him, and habit is made a valid reason against all
extenuation. On the other hand, a model life,
wherein crime shows up in more terrible contrast,
should make the guilt appear more heavy ! But
here the custom is to soften the punishment.
Everything is measured not from the standpoint
of the criminal but from that of society and its
losses and dangers. The previous utility of an
individual is weighed against his one nefarious
action, his previous criminality is added to that
recently discovered, and punishment is thus meted
out as highly as possible. But if we thus punish or
reward a man's past (for in the former case the
diminution of punishment is a reward) we ought
to go farther back and punish and reward the
cause of his past — I mean parents, teachers, society.
In many instances we shall then find the judges
somehow or other sharing in the guilt. It is ar-
bitrary to stop at the criminal himself when we
punish his past : if we will not grant the absolute
excusability of every crime, we should stop at each
individual case and probe no farther into the past
— in other words, isolate guilt and not connect it
with previous actions. Otherwise we sin against



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 209

logic. The teachers of free will should draw the
inevitable conclusion from their doctrine of " free
will " and boldly decree : " No action has a past."

29.

Envy and her Nobler Sister. — Where
equality is really recognised and permanently es-
tablished, we see the rise of that propensity that is
generally considered immoral, and would scarcely
be conceivable in a state of nature — envy. The
envious man is susceptible to every sign of in-
dividual superiority to the common herd, and
wishes to depress every one once more to the level
— or raise himself to the superior plane. Hence
arise two different modes of action, which Hesiod
designated good and bad Eris. In the same way, '
in a condition of equality there arises indignation
if A. is prosperous above and B. unfortunate beneath
their deserts and equality. These latter, however,
are emotions of nobler natures. They feel the
want of justice and equity in things that are in-
dependent of the arbitrary choice of men — or, in
other words, they desire the equality recognised by
man to be recognised as well by Nature and
chance. They are angry that men of equal merits
should not have equal fortune.

30.

The Envy of the Gods.—" The envy of the
Gods" arises when a despised person sets himself
on an equality with his superior (like Ajax), or is
made equal with him by the favour of fortune

VOL. II. O



210 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

(like Niobe, the too favoured mother). In the
social class system this envy demands that no one
shall have merits above his station, that his pros-
perity shall be on a level with his position, and
especially that his self-consciousness shall not out-
grow the limits of his rank. Often the victorious
general, or the pupil who achieves a masterpiece,
has experienced " the envy of the gods."



3i.

Vanity as an Anti-Social Aftergrowth. —
As men, for the sake of security, have made them-
selves equal in order to found communities, but
as also this conception is imposed by a sort of
constraint and is entirely opposed to the instincts
of the individual, so, the more universal security is
guaranteed, the more do new offshoots of the old
instinct for predominance appear. Such offshoots
appear in the setting-up of class distinctions, in the
demand for professional dignities and privileges,
and, generally speaking, in vanity (manners, dress,
speech, and so forth). So soon as danger to the
community is apparent, the majority, who were
unable to assert their preponderance in a time of
universal peace, once more bring about the condi-
tion of equality, and for the time being the absurd
privileges and vanities disappear. If the community,
however, collapses utterly and anarchy reigns su-
preme, there arises the state of nature : an ab-
solutely ruthless inequality as recounted by Thucy-
dides in the case of Corcyra. Neither a natural
justice nor a natural injustice exists.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 211

32.

Equity. — Equity is a development of justice,
and arises among such as do not come into conflict
with the communal equality. This more subtle
recognition of the principle of equilibrium is ap-
plied to cases where nothing is prescribed by law.
Equity looks forwards and backwards, its maxim
being, "Do unto others as you would that they
should do unto you." Aequum means : " This
principle is conformable to our equality ; it tones
down even our small differences to an appearance
of equality, and expects us to be indulgent in
cases where we are not compelled to pardon."



33-

Elements of Revenge. — The word " revenge "
is spoken so quickly that it almost seems as if it
could not contain more than one conceptual and
emotional root. Hence we are still at pains to find
this root. Our economists, in the same way, have
never wearied of scenting a similar unity in the
word "value," and of hunting after the primitive root
idea of value. As if all words were not pockets,
into which this or that or several things have been
stuffed at once ! So " revenge " is now one thing,
now another, and sometimes more composite. Let
us first distinguish that defensive counter-blow,
which we strike, almost unconsciously, even at in-
animate objects (such as machinery in motion) that
have hurt us. The notion is to set a check to the
object that has hurt us, by bringing the machine to



212 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

a stop. Sometimes the force of this counter-blow,
in order to attain its object, will have to be strong
enough to shatter the machine. If the machine be
too strong to be disorganised by one man, the latter
will all the same strike the most violent blow he can
— as a sort of last attempt. We behave similarly
towards persons who hurt us, at the immediate sen-
sation of the hurt. If we like to call this an act of
revenge, well and good : but we must remember that
here self-preservation alone has set its cog-wheels
of reason in motion, and that after all we do not
think of the doer of the injury but only of ourselves.
We act without any idea of doing injury in return,
only with a view to getting away safe and sound.
— It needs time to pass in thought from oneself to
one's adversary and ask oneself at what point he is
most vulnerable. This is done in the second variety
of revenge, the preliminary idea of which is to con-
sider the vulnerability and susceptibility of the other.
The intention then is to give pain. On the other
hand, the idea of securing himself against further
injury is in this case so entirely outside the avenger's
horizon, that he almost regularly brings about his
own further injury and often foresees it in cold
blood. If in the first sort of revenge it was the
fear of a second blow that made the counter-blow
as strong as possible, in this case there is an almost
complete indifference to what one's adversary will
do : the strength of the counter-blow is only deter-
mined by what he has already done to us. Then
what has he done ? What profit is it to us if he
is now suffering, after we have suffered through
him? This is a case of readjustment, whereas the






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 21 3

first act of revenge only serves the purpose of self-
preservation. It may be that through our adver-
sary we have lost property, rank, friends, children
— these losses are not recovered by revenge, the
readjustment only concerns a subsidiary loss which
is added to all the other losses. The revenge of
readjustment does not preserve one from further
injury, it does not make good the injury already
suffered — except in one case. If our honour has
suffered through our adversary, revenge can restore
it. But in any case honour has suffered an injury
if intentional harm has been done us, because our
adversary proved thereby that he was not afraid of
us. By revenge we prove that we are not afraid of
him either, and herein lies the settlement, the read-
justment. (The intention of showing their complete
lack of fear goes so far in some people that the
dangers of revenge — loss of health or life or other
losses — are in their eyes an indispensable condition
of every vengeful act. Hence they practise the duel,
although the law also offers them aid in obtaining
satisfaction for what they have suffered. They are
not satisfied with a safe means of recovering their
honour, because this would not prove their fearless-
ness.) — In the first-named variety of revenge it is
just fear that strikes the counter-blow; in the second
case it is the absence of fear, which, as has been said,
wishes to manifest itself in the counter-blow. — Thus
nothing appears more different than the motives of
the two courses of action which are designated by the
one word " revenge." Yet it often happens that the
avenger is not precisely certain as to what really
prompted his deed : perhaps he struck the counter-



214 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

blow from fear and the instinct of self-preservation,
but in the background, when he has time to reflect
upon the standpoint of wounded honour, he imagines
that he has avenged himself for the sake of his
honour — this motive is in any case more reputable
than the other. An essential point is whether he
sees his honour injured in the eyes of others (the
world) or only in the eyes of his offenders : in the
latter case he will prefer secret, in the former open
revenge. Accordingly, as he enters strongly or
feebly into the soul of the doer and the spectator,
his revenge will be more bitter or more tame. If
he is entirely lacking in this sort of imagination, he
will not think at all of revenge, as the feeling of
" honour " is not present in him, and accordingly
cannot be wounded. In the same way, he will not
think of revenge if he despises the offender and the
spectator ; because as objects of his contempt they
cannot give him honour, and accordingly cannot rob
him of honour. Finally, he will forego revenge in
the not uncommon case of his loving the offender.
It is true that he then suffers loss of honour in the
other's eyes, and will perhaps become less worthy
of having his love returned. But even to renounce
all requital of love is a sacrifice that love is ready
to make when its only object is to avoid hurting the
beloved object: this would mean hurting oneself
more than one is hurt by the sacrifice. — Accordingly,
every one will avenge himself, unless he be bereft
of honour or inspired by contempt or by love for the
offender. Even if he turns to the law-courts, he
desires revenge as a private individual ; but also, as
a thoughtful, prudent man of society, he desires the



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 21 5

revenge of society upon one who does not respect
it. Thus by legal punishment private honour as
well as that of society is restored — that is to say,
punishment is revenge. Punishment undoubtedly
contains the first-mentioned element of revenge,
in as far as by its means society helps to preserve
itself, and strikes a counter-blow in self-defence.
Punishment desires to prevent further injury, to
scare other offenders. In this way the two elements
of revenge, different as they are, are united in punish-
ment, and this may perhaps tend most of all to
maintain the above-mentioned confusion of ideas,
thanks to which the individual avenger generally
does not know what he really wants.



34-

The Virtues that Damage Us.— As members
of communities we think we have no right to exercise
certain virtues which afford us great honour and some
pleasure as private individuals (for example, indul-
gence and favour towards miscreants of all kinds) —
in short, every mode of action whereby the advantage
of society would suffer through our virtue. No bench
of judges, face to face with its conscience, may per-
mit itself to be gracious. This privilege is reserved
for the king as an individual, and we are glad when
he makes use of it, proving that we should like to be
gracious individually, but not collectively. Society
recognises only the virtues profitable to her, or at
least not injurious to her — virtues like justice, which
are exercised without loss, or, in fact, at compound
interest. The virtues that damage us cannot have



216 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

originated in society, because even now opposition
to them arises in every small society that is in the
making. Such virtues are therefore those of men
of unequal standing, invented by the superior indi-
viduals ; they are the virtues of rulers, and the idea
underlying them is : "I am mighty enough to put
up with an obvious loss ; that is a proof of my power."
Thus they are virtues closely akin to pride.

35-

The Casuistry of Advantage.— There would
be no moral casuistry if there were no casuistry of
advantage. The most free and refined intelligence
is often incapable of choosing between two alterna-
tives in such a way that his choice necessarily in-
volves the greater advantage. In such cases we
choose because we must, and afterwards often feel
a kind of emotional sea-sickness.

36.

Turning Hypocrite. — Every beggar turns
hypocrite, like every one who makes his living out
of indigence, be it personal or public. — The beggar
does not feel want nearly so keenly as he must make
others feel it, if he wishes to make a living by mendi-
cancy.

37-

A Sort of Cult of the Passions. — You

hypochondriacs, you philosophic blind-worms talk

of the formidable nature of human passions, in

order to inveigh against the dreadsomeness of the



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 21 7

whole world-structure. As if the passions were
always and everywhere formidable ! As if this
sort of terror must always exist in the world ! —
Through a carelessness in small matters, through
a deficiency in observation of self and of the ris-
ing generation, you have yourselves allowed your
passions to develop into such unruly monsters that
you are frightened now at the mere mention of the
word " passion " ! It rests with you and it rests
with us to divest the passions of their formidable
features and so to dam them that they do not
become devastating floods. — We must not exalt
our errors into eternal fatalities. Rather shall we
honestly endeavour to convert all the passions of
humanity into sources of joy.*

38.

The Sting of Conscience. — The sting of con-
science, like the gnawing of a dog at a stone, is
mere foolishness.

39-
Origin of Rights.— Rights may be traced to
traditions, traditions to momentary agreements. At
some time or other men were mutually content
with the consequences of making an agreement,
and, again, too indolent formally to renew it.
Thus they went on living as if it had constantly
been renewed, and gradually, when oblivion cast its

* The play on Freudenschaften {i.e. pleasure-giving passions)
and Leidenschaften (i.e. pain-giving passions) is often used by
Nietzsche, and is untranslateable. — Tr.



21 8 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






veil over the origin, they thought they possessed
a sacred, unalterable foundation on which every
generation would be compelled to build. Tradi-
tion was now a constraint, even if it no more in-
volved the profit originally derived from making the
agreement. — Here the weak have always found their
strong fortress. They are inclined to immortalise
the momentary agreement, the single act of favour
shown towards them.

40.

The Significance of Oblivion in Moral
Sentiment. — The same actions that in primitive
society first aimed at the common advantage were
later on performed from other motives : from fear
or reverence of those who demanded and recom-
mended them ; or from habit, because men had seen
them done about them from childhood upwards ;
or from kindness, because the practising of them
caused delight and approving looks on all sides;
or from vanity, because they were praised. Such
actions, in which the fundamental motive, that of
utility, has been forgotten, are then called moral ;
not, indeed, because they are done from those other
motives, but because they are not done with a con-
scious purpose of utility. — Whence the hatred of
utility that suddenly manifests itself here, and
by which all praiseworthy actions formally ex-
clude all actions for the sake of utility ? — Clearly
society, the rallying-point of all morality and of
all maxims in praise of moral action, has had to
battle too long and too fiercely with the selfishness
and obstinacy of the individual not to rate every



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 219

motive morally higher than utility. Hence it looks
as if morals had not sprung from utility, whereas
in fact morals are originally the public utility,
which had great difficulty in prevailing over the
interests of the unit and securing a loftier reputa-
tion.

41.

The Heirs to the Wealth of Morality.—
Even in the domain of morals there is an inherited
wealth, which is owned by the gentle, the good-
tempered, the compassionate, the indulgent. They
have inherited from their forefathers their gentle
mode of action, but not common sense (the source
of that mode of action). The pleasant thing about
this wealth is that one must always bestow and
communicate a portion of it, if its presence is to be
felt at all. Thus this wealth unconsciously aims
at bridging the gulf between the morally rich and
the morally poor, and, what is its best and most
remarkable feature, not for the sake of a future
mean between rich and poor, but for the sake of a
universal prosperity and superfluity. — Such may be
the prevailing view of inherited moral wealth, but
it seems to me that this view is maintained more
in majorem gloriam of morality than in honour
of truth. Experience at least establishes a maxim
which must serve, if not as a refutation, at any rate
as an important check upon that generalisation.
Without the most exquisite intelligence, says experi-
ence, without the most refined capacity for choice
and a strong propensity to observe the mean, the
morally rich will become spendthrifts of morality.



220

For by abandoning themselves without restraint to
their compassionate, gentle, conciliatory, harmon-
ising instincts, they make all about them more
careless, more covetous, and more sentimental.
The children of these highly moral spendthrifts
easily and (sad to relate) at best become pleasant
but futile wasters.

42.

The Judge and Extenuating Circum-
stances. — " One should behave as a man of honour
even towards the devil and pay his debts," said an
old soldier, when the story of Faust had been related
to him in rather fuller detail. " Hell is the right
place for Faust ! " " You are terrible, you men ! "
cried his wife ; " how can that be ? After all, his
only fault was having no ink in his ink-stand ! It
is indeed a sin to write with blood, but surely for
that such a handsome man ought not to burn in
Hell-fire?"

43-
Problem of the Duty of Truth. — Duty is
an imperious sentiment that forces us to action.
We call it good, and consider it outside the pale
of discussion. The origin, limits, and justification
of duty we will not debate or allow to be debated.
But the thinker considers everything an evolution
and every evolution a subject for discussion, and is
accordingly without duty so long as he is merely
a thinker. As such, he would not recognise the
duty of seeing and speaking the truth ; he would
not feel the sentiment at all. He asks, whence
comes it and whither will it go? But even this






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 221

questioning appears to him questionable. Surely,
however, the consequence would be that the think-
er's machinery would no longer work properly if
he could really feel himself unencumbered by duty
in the search for knowledge? It would appear,
then, that for fuel the same element is necessary as
must be investigated by means of the machine. —
Perhaps the formula will be : granted there were
a duty of recognising truth, what is then the truth
in regard to every other kind of duty? — But is
not a hypothetical sense of duty a contradiction in
terms ?

44.

Grades of Morals. — Morality is primarily
a means of preserving the community and saving
it from destruction. Next it is a means of main-
taining the community on a certain plane and in a
certain degree of benevolence. Its motives are fear
and hope, and these in a more coarse, rough, and
powerful form, the more the propensity towards
the perverse, one-sided, and personal still persists.
The most terrible means of intimidation must be
brought into play so long as milder forms have
no effect and that twofold species of preservation
cannot be attained. (The strongest intimidation,
by the way, is the invention of a hereafter with a
hell everlasting.) For this purpose we must have
racks and torturers of the soul. Further grades of
morality, and accordingly means to the end re-
ferred to, are the commandments of a God (as in
the Mosaic law). Still further and higher are the
commandments of an absolute sense of duty with



222 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

a " Thou shalt " — all rather roughly hewn yet broad
steps, because on the finer, narrower steps men
cannot yet set their feet. Then comes a morality
of inclination, of taste, finally of insight — which is
beyond all the illusory motives of morality, but
has convinced itself that humanity for long periods
could be allowed no other.

45-
The Morality of Pity in the Mouths of the
Intemperate. — All those who are not sufficiently
masters of themselves and do not know morality
as a self-control and self- conquest continuously
exercised in things great and small, unconsciously
come to glorify the good, compassionate, benevolent
impulses of that instinctive morality which has no
head, but seems merely to consist of a heart and
helpful hands. It is to their interest even to cast
suspicion upon a morality of reason and to set up
the other as the sole morality.

46.

Sewers of the Soul. — Even the soul must
have its definite sewers, through which it can allow
its filth to flow off: for this purpose it may use
persons, relations, social classes, its native country,
or the world, or finally — for the wholly arrogant (I
mean our modern " pessimists ") — le bon Dieu.

47.
A Kind of Rest and Contemplation.— Be-
ware lest your rest and contemplation resemble that



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 223

of a dog before a butcher's stall, prevented by fear
from advancing and by greed from retiring, and
opening its eyes wide as though they were mouths.

48.

Prohibitions without Reasons. — A prohibi-
tion, the reason of which we do not understand or
admit, is almost a command, not only for the stiff-
necked but for the thirster after knowledge. We
at once make an experiment in order to learn why
the prohibition was made. Moral prohibitions, like
those of the Decalogue, are only suited to ages
when reason lies vanquished. Nowadays a pro-
hibition like "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt
not commit adultery," laid down without reasons,
would have an injurious rather than a beneficial
effect.

49-

Character Portrait.— What sort of a man
is it that can say of himself : " I despise very easily,
but never hate. I at once find out in every man
something which can be honoured and for which I
honour him : the so-called amiable qualities attract
me but little"?

50.

Pity and Contempt. — The expression of pity
is regarded as a sign of contempt, because one has
clearly ceased to be an object oifear as soon as one
becomes an object of pity. One has sunk below
the level of the equilibrium. For this equilibrium
does not satisfy human vanity, which is only satis-



224 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

fied by the feeling that one is imposing respect and
awe. Hence it is difficult to explain why pity is
so highly prized, just as we need to explain why
the unselfish man, who is originally despised or
feared as being artful, is praised.

5i-
The Capacity of Being Small. — We must
be as near to flowers, grasses, and butterflies as
a child, that is, not much bigger than they. We
adults have grown up beyond them and have to
stoop to them. I think the grasses hate us when
we confess our love for them. — He who would have
a share in all good things must understand at times
how to be small.

52.

The Sum-Total of Conscience.— The sum-
total of our conscience is all that has regularly been
demanded of us, without reason, in the days of our
childhood, by people whom we respected or feared.
From conscience comes that feeling of obligation
(" This I must do, this omit ") which does not ask,
Why must I ? — In all cases where a thing is done
with " because " and " why," man acts without con-
science, but not necessarily on that account against
conscience. — The belief in authority is the source of
conscience ; which is therefore not the voice of God
in the heart of man, but the voice of some men in
man.

53-
Conquest of the Passions.— The man who has
overcome his passions has entered into possession






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 225

of the most fruitful soil, like the colonist who has
become lord over bogs and forests. To sow the
seed of spiritual good works on the soil of the
vanquished passions is the next and most urgent
task. The conquest itself is a means, not an end :
if it be not so regarded, all kind of weeds and
devil's crop quickly spring up upon the fertile soil
that has been cleared, and soon the growth is all
wilder and more luxuriant than before.

54-

Skill in Service. — All so-called practical men
have skill in service, whether it be serving others
or themselves ; this is what makes them practical.
Robinson owned a servant even better than Friday
— his name was Crusoe.

55-
Danger in Speech to Intellectual Free-
dom. — Every word is a preconceived judgment.

5 6.

Intellect and Boredom. — The proverb, " The
Hungarian is far too lazy to feel bored," gives food
for thought. Only the highest and most active
animals are capable of being bored. — The boredom
of God on the seventh day of Creation would be a
subject for a great poet.

57-
Intercourse with Animals.— The origin of
our morality may still be observed in our relations

VOL. II. P



226 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

with animals. Where advantage or the reverse do
not come into play, we have a feeling of complete
irresponsibility. For example, we kill or wound
insects or let them live, and as a rule think no more
about it. We are so clumsy that even our gracious
acts towards flowers and small animals are almost
always murderous : this does not in the least detract
from our pleasure in them. — To-day is the festival
of the small animals, the most sultry day of the
year. There is a swarming and crawling around
us, and we, without intention, but also without
reflection, crush here and there a little fly or
winged beetle. — If animals do us harm, we strive
to annihilate them in every possible way. The
means are often cruel enough, even without our
really intending them to be so — it is the cruelty of
thoughtlessness. If they are useful, we turn them
to advantage, until a more refined wisdom teaches
us that certain animals amply reward a different
mode of treatment, that of tending and breeding.
Here responsibility first arises. Torturing is avoided
in the case of the domestic animal. One man is
indignant if another is cruel to his cow, quite in
accordance with the primitive communal morality,
which sees the commonwealth in danger whenever
an individual does wrong. He who perceives any
transgression in the community fears indirect harm
to himself. Thus we fear in this case for the quality
of meat, agriculture, and means of communication
if we see the domestic animals ill-treated. More-
over, he who is harsh to animals awakens a suspicion
that he is also harsh to men who are weak, inferior,
and incapable of revenge. He is held to be ignoble



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 227

and deficient in the finer form of pride. Thus arises
a foundation of moral judgments and sentiments,
but the greatest contribution is made by supersti-
tion. Many animals incite men by glances, tones,
and gestures to transfer themselves into them
in imagination, and some religions teach us, under
certain circumstances, to see in animals the dwelling-
place of human and divine souls : whence they re-
commend a nobler caution or even a reverential
awe in intercourse with animals. Even after the
disappearance of this superstition the sentiments
awakened by it continue to exercise their influence,
to ripen and to blossom. — Christianity, as is well
known, has shown itself in this respect a poor and
retrograde religion.

58.

New Actors. — Among human beings there is
no greater banality than death. Second in order,
because it is possible to die without being born,
comes birth, and next comes marriage. But these
hackneyed little tragi-comedies are always pre-
sented, at each of their unnumbered and innumerable
performances, by new actors, and accordingly do
not cease to find interested spectators : whereas we
might well believe that the whole audience of the
world-theatre had long since hanged themselves to
every tree from sheer boredom at these performances.
So much depends on new actors, so little on the
piece.

59.

What is " Being Obstinate " ?— The shortest
way is not the straightest possible, but that wherein



228 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






favourable winds swell our sails. So says the wis-
dom of seamen. Not to follow his course is obsti-
nate, firmness of character being then adulterated
by stupidity.

60.

The Word "Vanity." — It is annoying that
certain words, with which we moralists positively
cannot dispense, involve in themselves a kind of
censorship of morals, dating from the times when
the most ordinary and natural impulses were de-
nounced. Thus that fundamental conviction that
on the waves of society we either find navigable
waters or suffer shipwreck far more through what
we appear than through what we are (a conviction
that must act as guiding principle of all action in
relation to society) is branded with the general word
" vanity." In other words, one of the most weighty
and significant of qualities is branded with an ex-
pression which denotes it as essentially empty and
negative : a great thing is designated by a diminu-
tive, ay, even slandered by the strokes of caricature.
There is no help for it ; we must use such words, but
then we must shut our ears to the insinuations of
ancient habits.

61.

The Fatalism of the Turk. — The fatalism of
the Turk has this fundamental defect, that it con-
trasts man and fate as two distinct things. Man,
says this doctrine, may struggle against fate and
try to baffle it, but in the end fate will always gain
the victory. Hence the most rational course is to



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 229

resign oneself or to live as one pleases. As a
matter of fact, every man is himself a piece of fate.
When he thinks that he is struggling against fate
in this way, fate is accomplishing its ends even in
that struggle. The combat is a fantasy, but so is the
resignation in fate — all these fantasies are included
in fate. — The fear felt by most people of the doctrine
that denies the freedom of the will is a fear of the
fatalism of the Turk. They imagine that man will
become weakly resigned and will stand before the
future with folded hands, because he cannot alter
anything of the future. Or that he will give a free
rein to his caprices, because the predestined cannot
be made worse by that course. The follies of men
are as much a piece of fate as are his wise actions,
and even that fear of belief in fate is a fatality. You
yourself, you poor timid creature, are that indomit-
able Moira, which rules even the Gods ; whatever
may happen, you are a curse or a blessing, and
in any case the fetters wherein the strongest lies
bound : in you the whole future of the human world
is predestined, and it is no use for you to be frightened
of yourself.

62.

The Advocate of the Devil. — " Only by our
own suffering do we become wise, only by others'
suffering do we become good " — so runs that strange
philosophy which derives all morality from pity and
all intellectuality from the isolation of the individual.
Herein this philosophy is the unconscious pleader
for all human deterioration. For pity needs suffer-
ing, and isolation contempt of others.



230 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






63.

The Moral Character -Masks. — In ages
when the character-masks of different classes are
definitely fixed, like the classes themselves, moralists
will be seduced into holding the moral character-
masks, too, as absolute, and in delineating them
accordingly. Thus Moliere is intelligible as the
contemporary of the society of Louis XIV. : in our
society of transitions and intermediate stages he
would seem an inspired pedant.

64.
The Most Noble Virtue. — In the first era of
the higher humanity courage is accounted the most
noble virtue, in the next justice, in the third temper-
ance, in the fourth wisdom. In which era do we
live ? In which do you live ?

65.
A Necessary Preliminary. — A man who will
not become master of his irritability, his venomous
and vengeful feelings, and his lust, and attempts to
become master in anything else, is as stupid as the
farmer who lays out his field beside a torrent with-
out guarding against that torrent.

66.

What is Truth? — Schwarzert (Melanchthon) :
We often preach our faith when we have lost it, and
leave not a stone unturned to find it — and then we
often do not preach worst !



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 23 1

Luther : Brother, you are really speaking like an
angel to-day.

Schwarzert'. But that is the idea of your enemies,
and they apply it to you.

Luther-. Then it would be a lie from the devil's
hind-quarters.

67.
The Habit of Contrasts. — Superficial, in-
exact observation sees contrasts everywhere in
nature (for instance, " hot and cold "), where there
are no contrasts, only differences of degree. This
bad habit has induced us to try to understand
and interpret even the inner nature, the intellectual
and moral world, in accordance with such contrasts.
An infinite amount of cruelty, arrogance, harshness,
estrangement, and coldness has entered into human
emotion, because men imagined they saw contrasts
where there were only transitions.



68.

Can We Forgive ? — How can we forgive them
at all, if they know not what they do ? We have
nothing to forgive. But does a man ever fully know
what he is doing ? And if this point at least remains
always debatable, men never have anything to for-
give each other, and indulgence is for the reason-
able man an impossible thing. Finally, if the
evil-doers had really known what they did, we
should still only have a right to forgive if we had a
right to accuse and to punish. But we have not
that right.



232 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

6 9 .

Habitual Shame.— Why do we feel shame
when some virtue or merit is attributed to us which,
as the saying goes, "we have not deserved"?
Because we appear to have intruded upon a territory
to which we do not belong, from which we should
be excluded, as from a holy place or holy of holies,
which ought not to be trodden by our foot. Through
the errors of others we have, nevertheless, penetrated
to it, and we are now swayed partly by fear, partly
by reverence, partly by surprise ; we do not know
whether we ought to fly or to enjoy the blissful
moment with all its gracious advantages. In all
shame there is a mystery, which seems desecrated or
in danger of desecration through us. All favour
begets shame. — But if it be remembered that we
have never really " deserved " anything, this feeling
of shame, provided that we surrender ourselves to
this point of view in a spirit of Christian contem-
plation, becomes habitual, because upon such a
one God seems continually to be conferring his
blessing and his favours. Apart from this Christian
interpretation, the state of habitual shame will be
possible even to the entirely godless sage, who
clings firmly to the basic non-responsibility and non-
meritoriousness of all action and being. If he be
treated as if he had deserved this or that, he will
seem to have won his way into a higher order of
beings, who do actually deserve something, who are
free and can really bear the burden of responsibility
for their own volition and capacity. Whoever says
to him, "You have deserved it," appears to cry



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 233

out to him, "You are not a human being, but a
God."

70.

The Most Unskilful Teacher. — In one man
all his real virtues are implanted on the soil of his
spirit of contradiction, in another on his incapacity
to say "no" — in other words, on his spirit of ac-
quiescence. A third has made all his morality grow
out of his pride as a solitary, a fourth from his
strong social instinct. Now,supposing that theseeds
of the virtues in these four cases, owing to mischance
or unskilful teachers, were not sown on the soil of
their nature, which provides them with the richest
and most abundant mould, they would become
weak, unsatisfactory men (devoid of morality).
And who would have been the most unskilful of
teachers, the evil genius of these men ? The moral
fanatic, who thinks that the good can only grow
out of the good and on the soil of the good.



7h

The Cautious Style.— A. But if this were
known to all, it would be injurious to the majority.
You yourself call your opinions dangerous to those
in danger, and yet you make them public ?

B. I write so that neither the mob, nor the
populiy nor the parties of all kinds can read me. So
my opinions will never be " public opinions."

A. How do you write, then?

B. Neither usefully nor pleasantly — for the three
classes I have mentioned.



234 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

72.

Divine Missionaries. — Even Socrates feels
himself to be a divine missionary, but I am not sure
whether we should not here detect a tincture of that
Attic irony and fondness for jesting whereby this
odious, arrogant conception would be toned down.
He talks of the fact without unction — his images of
the gadfly and the horse are simple and not sacer-
dotal. The real religious task which he has set
himself — to test God in a hundred ways and see
whether he spoke the truth — betrays a bold and free
attitude, in which the missionary walked by the side
of his God. This testing of God is one of the most
subtle compromises between piety and free-thinking
that has ever been devised. — Nowadays we do not
even need this compromise any longer.

73-
Honesty in Painting. — Raphael, who cared a
great deal for the Church (so far as she could pay
him), but, like the best men of his time, cared little
for the objects of the Church's belief, did not advance
one step to meet the exacting, ecstatic piety of many
of his patrons. He remained honest even in that
exceptional picture which was originally intended
for a banner in a procession — the Sistine Madonna.
Here for once he wished to paint a vision, but such
a vision as even noble youths without " faith " may
and will have — the vision of the future wife, a wise,
high-souled, silent, and very beautiful woman, carry-
ing her first-born in her arms. Let men of an older
generation, accustomed to prayer and devotion, find



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 235

here, like the worthy elder on the left, something
superhuman to revere. We younger men (so
Raphael seems to call to us) are occupied with the
beautiful maiden on the right, who says to the
spectator of the picture, with her challenging and
by no means devout look, "The mother and her
child — is not that a pleasant, inviting sight ? " The
face and the look are reflected in the joy in the faces
of the beholders. The artist who devised all this
enjoys himself in this way, and adds his own delight
to the delight of the art-lover. As regards the
" messianic " expression in the face of the child,
Raphael, honest man, who would not paint any
state of soul in which he did not believe, has
amiably cheated his religious admirers. He painted
that freak of nature which is very often found, the
man's eye in the child's face, and that, too, the eye
of a brave, helpful man who sees distress. This eye
should be accompanied by a beard. The fact that a
beard is wanting, and that two different ages are seen
in one countenance, is the pleasing paradox which
believers have interpreted in accordance with their
faith in miracles. The artist could only expect as
much from their art of exposition and interpretation.



74.

Prayer. — On two hypotheses alone is there any
sense in prayer, that not quite extinct custom of
olden times. It would have to be possible either
to fix or alter the will of the godhead, and the
devotee would have to know best himself what he
needs and should really desire. Both hypotheses,



236 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

axiomatic and traditional in all other religions, are
denied by Christianity. If Christianity neverthe-
less maintained prayer side by side with its belief
in the all-wise and all-provident divine reason (a
belief that makes prayer really senseless and even
blasphemous), it showed here once more its admir-
able " wisdom of the serpent." For an outspoken
command, " Thou shalt not pray," would have led
Christians by way of boredom to the denial of
Christianity. In the Christian ora et labora ora
plays the role of pleasure. Without ora what could
those unlucky saints who renounced labora have
done ? But to have a chat with God, to ask him
for all kinds of pleasant things, to feel a slight
amusement at one's own folly in still having any
wishes at all, in spite of so excellent a father — all
that was an admirable invention for saints.

75-
A HOLY Lie. — The lie that was on Arria's lips
when she died {Paete, non dolet *) obscures all the
truths that have ever been uttered by the dying.
It is the only holy lie that has become famous,
whereas elsewhere the odour of sanctity has clung
only to errors.

76.

The Most Necessary Apostle. — Among
twelve apostles one must always be hard as stone, in
order that upon him the new church may be built.

* The wife of the Stoic Thrasea Paetus, when their com-
plicity in the great conspiracy of 65 a.d. against Nero was
discovered, is reported to have said as she committed suicide,
" It doesn't hurt, Paetus."— Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 237

77.

Which is more Transitory, the Body or
the Spirit ? — In legal, moral, and religious institu-
tions the external and concrete elements — in other
words, rites, gestures, and ceremonies — are the most
permanent. They are the body to which a new
spirit is constantly being superadded. The cult,
like an unchangeable text, is ever interpreted anew.
Concepts and emotions are fluid, customs are solid.

78.

The Belief in Disease qua Disease. —
Christianity first painted the devil on the wall of
the world. Christianity first brought the idea of sin
into the world. The belief in the remedies, which
is offered as an antidote, has gradually been shaken
to its very foundations. But the belief in the
disease, which Christianity has taught and propa-
gated, still exists.

79-

Speech and Writings of Religious Men. —
If the priest's style and general expression, both in
speaking and writing, do not clearly betray the
religious man, we need no longer take his views
upon religion and his pleading for religion seriously.
These opinions have become powerless for him if,
judging by his style, he has at command irony,
arrogance, malice, hatred, and all the changing
eddies of mood, just like the most irreligious of
men — how far more powerless will they be for his



238 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

hearers and readers! In short, he will serve to
make the latter still more irreligious.



80.

The Danger in Personality. — The more
God has been regarded as a personality in himself,
the less loyal have we been to him. Men are far
more attached to their thought-images than to their
best beloved. That is why they sacrifice themselves
for State, Church, and even for God — so far as he
remains their creation, their thought, and is not too
much looked upon as a personality. In the latter
case they almost always quarrel with him. After
all, it was the most pious of men who let slip that
bitter cry : " My God, why hast thou forsaken me ? "

81.

Worldly Justice.— It is possible to unhinge
worldly justice with the doctrine [of the complete
non - responsibility and innocence of every man.
An attempt has been made in the same direction
on the basis of the opposite doctrine of the full
responsibility and guilt of every man. It was the
founder of Christianity who wished to abolish
worldly justice and banish judgment and punish-
ment from the world. For he understood all guilt
as " sin " — that is, an outrage against God and not
against the world. On the other hand, he con-
sidered every man in a broad sense, and almost
in every sense, a sinner. The guilty, however, are
not to be the judges of their peers — so his rules



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 239

of equity decided. Thus all dispensers of worldly
justice were in his eyes as culpable as those they
condemned, and their air of guiltlessness appeared
to him hypocritical and pharisaical. Moreover, he
looked to the motives and not to the results of
actions, and thought that only one was keen-sighted
enough to give a verdict on motives — himself or, as
he expressed it, God.

82.

An Affectation in Parting.— He who wishes
to sever his connection with a party or a creed thinks
it necessary for him to refute it. This is a most
arrogant notion. The only thing necessary is that
he should clearly see what tentacles hitherto held
him to this party or creed and no longer hold him,
what views impelled him to it and now impel him
in some other directions. We have not joined the
party or creed on strict grounds of knowledge. We
should not affect this attitude on parting from it
either.

83.
Saviour and Physician.— In his knowledge of
the human soul the founder of Christianity was, as
is natural, not without many great deficiencies and
prejudices, and, as physician of the soul, was ad-
dicted to that disreputable, laical belief in a universal
medicine. In his methods he sometimes resembles
that dentist who wishes to heal all pain by extract-
ing the tooth. Thus, for example, he assails sensu-
ality with the advice : " If thine eye offend thee,
pluck it out." — Yet there still remains the distinction



240 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that the dentist at least attains his object — painless-
ness for the patient — although in so clumsy a fashion
that he becomes ridiculous ; whereas the Christian
who follows that advice and thinks he has killed
his sensuality, is wrong, for his sensuality still lives
in an uncanny, vampire form, and torments him in
hideous disguises.

84.

Prisoners. — One morning the prisoners entered
the yard for work, but the warder was not there.
Some, as their manner was, set to work at once ;
others stood idle and gazed defiantly around.
Then one of them strode forward and cried, " Work
as much as you will or do nothing, it all comes to
the same. Your secret machinations have come to
light ; the warder has been keeping his eye on you
of late, and will cause a terrible judgment to be
passed upon you in a few days' time. You know
him — he is of a cruel and resentful disposition.
But now, listen : you have mistaken me hitherto.
I am not what I seem, but far more — I am the son
of the warder, and can get anything I like out of
him. I can save you — nay, I will save you. But
remember this : I will only save those of you who
believe that I am the son of the prison warder.
The rest may reap the fruits of their unbelief."
"Well," said an old prisoner after an interval of
silence, "what can it matter to you whether we
believe you or not ? If you are really the son, and
can do what you say, then put in a good word for
us all. That would be a real kindness on your
part. But have done with all talk of belief and




THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 241

unbelief! " " What is more," cried a younger man,
" I don't believe him : he has only got a bee in his
bonnet. I'll wager that in a week's time we shall
find ourselves in the same place as we are to-day,
and the warder will know nothing." " And if the
warder ever knew anything, he knows it no longer,"
said the last of the prisoners, coming down into
the yard at that moment, "for he has just died
suddenly." " Ah ha ! " cried several in confusion,
" ah ha ! Sir Son, Sir Son, how stands it now with
your title ? Are we by any chance your prisoners
now ? " "I told you," answered the man gently,
'' I will set free all who believe in me, as surely as
my father still lives." — The prisoners did not laugh,
but shrugged their shoulders and left him to himself.

8 5 .
The Persecutors of God.— Paul conceived
and Calvin followed up the idea that countless
creatures have been predestined to damnation from
time immemorial, and that this fair world was
made in order that the glory of God might be
manifested therein. So heaven and hell and man-
kind merely exist to satisfy the vanity of God !
What acruel, insatiable vanity must have smouldered
in the soul of the first or second thinker of such a
thought ! — Paul, then, after all, remained Saul — the
persecutor of God.

S6.

Socrates. — If all goes well, the time will come
when, in order to advance themselves on the path



242 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

of moral reason, men will rather take up the
Memorabilia of Socrates than the Bible, and when
Montaigne and Horace will be used as pioneers and
guides for the understanding of Socrates, the simplest
and most enduring of interpretative sages. In him
converge the roads of the most different philo-
sophic modes of life, which are in truth the modes of
the different temperaments, crystallised by reason
and habit and all ultimately directed towards the
delight in life and in self. The apparent conclu-
sion is that the most peculiar thing about Socrates
was his share in all the temperaments. Socrates
excels the founder of Christianity by virtue of his
merry style of seriousness and by that wisdom of
sheer roguish pranks which constitutes the best state
of soul in a man. Moreover, he had a superior in-
telligence.

87.

Learning to Write Well.— The age of good
speaking is over, because the age of city-state culture
is over. The limit allowed by Aristotle to the
great city — in which the town-crier must be able
to make himself heard by the whole assembled
community — troubles us as little as do any city-
communities, us who even wish to be understood
beyond the boundaries of nations. Therefore
every one who is of a good European turn of mind
must learn to write well, and to write better and
better. He cannot help himself, he must learn
that : even if he was born in Germany, where bad
writing is looked upon as a national privilege.
Better writing means better thinking; always to



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 243

discover matter more worthy of communication ; to
be able to communicate it properly ; to be translate-
able into the tongues of neighbouring nations ; to
make oneself comprehensible to foreigners who
learn our language; to work with the view of
making all that is good common property, and of
giving free access everywhere to the free; finally,
to pave the way for that still remote state of things,
when the great task shall come for good Europeans —
guidance and guardianship of the universal world-
culture. — Whoever preaches the opposite doctrine
of not troubling about good writing and good
reading (both virtues grow together and decline
together) is really showing the peoples a way of
becoming more and more national. He is intensi-
fying the malady of this century, and is a foe to
good Europeans, a foe to free spirits.



88.

The Theory of the Best Style. — The theory
of the best style may at one time be the theory of
finding the expression by which we transfer every
mood of ours to the reader and the listener. At
another, it may be the theory of finding expressions
for the more desirable human moods, the communi-
cation and transference of which one desires most
— for the mood of a man moved from the depth of
his heart, intellectually cheerful, bright, and sincere,
who has conquered his passions. This will be the
theory of the best style, a theory that corresponds
to the good man.



244 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

8 9 .

Paying Attention to Movement. — The
movement of the sentences shows whether the
author be tired. Individual expressions may never-
theless be still strong and good, because they were
invented earlier and for their own sake, when the
thought first flashed across the author's mind. This
is frequently the case with Goethe, who too often
dictated when he was tired.

90.

"Already" and "Still." — A. German prose
is still very young. Goethe declares that Wieland
is its father.

B. So young and already so ugly !

C. But, so far as I am aware, Bishop Ulfilas al-
ready wrote German prose, which must therefore
be fifteen hundred years old.

B. So old and still so ugly !

91.
Original German. — German prose, which is
really not fashioned on any pattern and must be
considered an original creation of German taste,
should give the eager advocate of a future original
German culture an indication of how real German
dress, German society, German furniture, German
meals would look without the imitation of models.
— Some one who had long reflected on these vistas
finally cried in great horror, " But, Heaven help us,
perhaps we already have that original culture —
only we don't like to talk about it ! "



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 245
92.

Forbidden Books. — One should never read
anything written by those arrogant wiseacres and
puzzle-brains who have the detestable vice of
logical paradox. They apply logical formulae just
where everything is really improvised at random
and built in the air. (" Therefore " with them
means, "You idiot of a reader, this 'therefore'
does not exist for you, but only for me." The
answer to this is : " You idiot of a writer, then why
do you write ? ")

93.
Displaying One's Wit. — Every one who wishes
to display his wit thereby proclaims that he has
also a plentiful lack of wife That vice which clever
Frenchmen have of adding a touch oidedain to their
best ideas arises from a desire to be considered
richer than they really are. They wish to be care-
lessly generous, as if weary of continual spending
from overfull treasuries.

94-
French and German Literature.— The mis-
fortune of the French and German literature of the
last hundred years is that the Germans ran away too
early from the French school, and the French, later
on, went too early to the German school.

95-
OUR PROSE. — None of the present-day cultured
nations has so bad a prose as the German. When



246 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



I



clever, blast Frenchmen say, " There is no German
prose," we ought really not to be angry, for this
criticism is more polite than we deserve. If we look
for reasons, we come at last to the strange pheno-
menon that the German knows only improvised
prose and has no conception of any other. He
simply cannot understand the Italian, who says that
prose is as much harder than poetry as the repre-
sentation of naked beauty is harder to the sculptor
than that of draped beauty. Verse, images, rhythm,
and rhyme need honest effort — that even the German
realises, and he is not inclined to set a very high
value on extempore poetry. But the notion of work-
ing at a page of prose as at a statue sounds to him
like a tale from fairyland.

96.

The Grand Style. — The grand style comes into
being when the beautiful wins a victory over the
monstrous.

97.
DODGING. — We do not realise, in the case of dis-
tinguished minds, wherein lies the excellence of their
expression, their turn of phrase, until we can say
what word every mediocre writer would inevitably
have hit upon in expressing the same idea. All great
artists, in steering their car, show themselves prone
to dodge and leave the track, but never to fall over.

98.
Something like Bread. — Bread neutralises
and takes out the taste of other food, and is there-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 247

fore necessary to every long meal. In all works of
art there must be something like bread, in order that
they may produce divers effects. If these effects
followed one another without occasional pauses and
intervals, they would soon make us weary and pro-
voke disgust — in fact, a long meal of art would then
be impossible.

99-

Jean Paul. — Jean Paul knew a great deal, but
had no science ; understood all manner of tricks of
art, but had no art ; found almost everything enjoy-
able, but had no taste ; possessed feeling and serious-
ness, but in dispensing them poured over them a
nauseous sauce of tears ; had even wit, but, unfor-
tunately for his ardent desire for it, far too little —
whence he drives the reader to despair by his very
lack of wit. In short, he was the bright, rank :
smelling weed that shot up overnight in the fair
pleasaunces of Schiller and Goethe. He was a good,
comfortable man, and yet a destiny, a destiny in a
dressing-gown.*



100.

Palate for Opposites.— In order to enjoy a
work of the past as its contemporaries enjoyed it,
one must have a palate for the prevailing taste of
the age which it attacked.

* It is interesting to compare this judgment with Carlyle's
praise of Jean Paul. The dressing-gown is an allusion to
Jean Paul's favourite costume. — Tr.



248 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






IOI.

Spirits-OF-Wine Authors.— Many writers are
neither spirit nor wine, but spirits of wine. They
can flare up, and then they give warmth.

102.
The Interpretative Sense.— The sense of
taste, as the true interpretative sense, often talks the
other senses over to its point of view and imposes
upon them its laws and customs. At table one can
receive disclosures about the most subtle secrets of
the arts ; it suffices to observe what tastes good and
when and after what and how long it tastes good.

103.
LESSING. — Lessing had a genuine French talent,
and, as writer, went most assiduously to the French
school. He knows well how to arrange and display
his wares in his shop-window. Without this true
art his thoughts, like the objects of them, would have
remained rather in the dark, nor would the general
loss be great. His art, however, has taught many
(especially the last generation of German scholars)
and has given enjoyment to a countless number.
It is true his disciples had no need to learn from
him, as they often did, his unpleasant tone with its
mingling of petulance and candour. — Opinion is now
unanimous on Lessing as " lyric poet," and will some
day be unanimous on Lessing as " dramatic poet."

104.
Undesirable Readers. — How an author is
vexed by those stolid, awkward readers who always



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 249

fall at every place where they stumble, and always
hurt themselves when they fall !



105.

Poets' Thoughts. — Real thoughts of real poets
always go about with a veil on, like Egyptian women ;
only the deep eye of thought looks out freely through
the veil. — Poets' thoughts are as a rule not of such
value as is supposed. We have to pay for the veil
and for our own curiosity into the bargain.

106.

Write Simply and Usefully. — Transitions,
details, colour in depicting the passions — we make
a present of all these to the author because we bring
them with us and set them down to the credit of his
book, provided he makes us some compensation.

107.

WlELAND. — Wieland wrote German better than
any one else, and had the genuine adequacies and
inadequacies of the master. His translations of
the letters of Cicero and Lucian are the best in
the language. His ideas, however, add nothing to
our store of thought. We can endure his cheerful
moralities as little as his cheerful immoralities, for
both are very closely connected. The men who en-
joyed them were at bottom better men than we are,
but also a good deal heavier. They needed an author
of this sort. The Germans did not need Goethe, and
therefore cannot make proper use of him. We have



250 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

only to consider the best of our statesmen and
artists in this light. None of them had or could
have had Goethe as their teacher.



108.

Rare Festivals. — Pithyconciseness, repose, and
maturity — where you find these qualities in an
author, cry halt and celebrate a great festival in the
desert. It will be long before you have such a treat
again.

109.

The Treasure of German Prose. — Apart
from Goethe's writings and especially Goethe's con-
versations with Eckermann (the best German book
in existence), what German prose literature remains
that is worth reading over and over again ? Lichten-
berg's Aphorisms, the first book of Jung-Stilling's
Story of My Life, Adalbert Stifter's St. Martin's
Summer and Gottfried Keller's People of Seldwyla
— and there, for the time being, it comes to an end.

no.

Literary and Colloquial Style.— The art
of writing demands, first and foremost, substitutions
for the means of expression which speech alone
possesses — in other words, for gestures, accent, in-
tonation, and look. Hence literary style is quite
different from colloquial style, and far more difficult,
because it has to make itself as intelligible as the
latter with fewer accessaries. Demosthenes delivered
his speeches differently from what we read ; he



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 25 I

worked them up for reading purposes. — Cicero's
speeches ought to be " demosthenised " with the
same object, for at present they contain more of the
Roman Forum than we can endure.

in.

Caution in Quotation. — Young authors do
not know that a good expression or idea only looks
well among its peers ; that an excellent quotation
may spoil whole pages, nay the whole book ; for it
seems to cry warningly to the reader, " Mark you, I
am the precious stone, and round about me is lead
— pale, worthless lead ! " Every word, every idea
only desires to live in its own company — that is the
moral of a choice style.

112.

How should Errors be Enunciated? — We
may dispute whether it be more injurious for errors
to be enunciated badly or as well as the best truths.
It is certain that in the former case they are doubly
harmful to the brain and are less easily removed
from it. But, on the other hand, they are not so
certain of effect as in the latter case. They are, in
fact, less contagious.

1*3-

Limiting and Widening. — Homer limited and
diminished the horizon of his subject, but allowed
individual scenes to expand and blossom out.
Later, the tragedians are constantly renewing this
process. Each takes his material in ever smaller
and smaller fragments than his predecessor did, but



252 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

each attains a greater wealth of blooms within the
narrow hedges of these sequestered garden en-
closures.

114.

Literature and Morality Mutually Ex-
planatory. — We can show from Greek literature
by what forces the Greek spirit developed, how it
entered upon different channels, and where it be-
came enfeebled. All this also depicts to us how
Greek morality proceeded, and how all morality will
proceed : how it was at first a constraint and dis-
played cruelty, then became gradually milder ; how
a pleasure in certain actions, in certain forms and
conventions arose, and from this again a propensity
for solitary exercise, for solitary possession ; how the
track becomes crowded and overcrowded with com-
petitors ; how satiety enters in, new objects of struggle
and ambition are sought, and forgotten aims are
awakened to life ; how the drama is repeated, and the
spectators become altogether weary of looking on,
because the whole gamut seems to have been run
through — and then comes a stoppage, an expira-
tion, and the rivulets are lost in the sand. The end,
or at any rate an end, has come.

115.

What Landscapes give Permanent De-
light. — Such and such a landscape has features
eminently suited for painting, but I cannot find the
formula for it ; it remains beyond my grasp as a
whole. I notice that all landscapes which please
me permanently have a simple geometrical scheme



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 253

of lines underneath all their complexity. Without
such a mathematical substratum no scenery be-
comes artistically pleasing. Perhaps this rule may
be applied symbolically to human beings.

116.

Reading Aloud. — The ability to read aloud
involves of necessity the ability to declaim. Every-
where we must apply pale tints, but we must deter-
mine the degree of pallor in close relation to the
richly and deeply coloured background, that always
hovers before our eyes and acts as our guide — in
other words, in accordance with the way in which
we should declaim the same passages. That is why
we must be able to declaim.

117.

The Dramatic Sense. — He who has not the
four subtler senses of art tries to understand every-
thing with the fifth sense, which is the coarsest of all
— the dramatic sense.

118.

Herder. — Herder fails to be all that he made
people think he was and himself wished to think he
was. He was no great thinker or discoverer, no
newly fertile soil with the unexhausted strength of a
virgin forest. But he possessed in the highest degree
the power of scenting the future, he saw and picked
the first-fruits of the seasons earlier than all others,
and they then believed that he had made them
grow. Between darkness and light, youth and age,



254 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

his mind was like a hunter on the watch, looking
everywhere for transitions, depressions, convulsions,
the outward and visible signs of internal growth.
The unrest of spring drove him to and fro, but he
was himself not the spring. — At times, indeed, he
had some inkling of this, and yet would fain not
have believed it — he, the ambitious priest, who
would have so gladly been the intellectual pope of
his epoch ! This is his despair. He seems to have
lived long as a pretender to several kingdoms or
even to a universal monarchy. He had his follow-
ing which believed in him, among others the young
Goethe. But whenever crowns were really distri-
buted, he was passed over. Kant, Goethe, and then
the first true German historians and scholars robbed
him of what he thought he had reserved for himself
(although in silence and secret he often thought the
reverse). Just when he doubted in himself, he
gladly clothed himself in dignity and enthusiasm :
these were often in him mere garments, which had
to hide a great deal and also to deceive and comfort
him. He really had fire and enthusiasm, but his
ambition was far greater ! It blew impatiently at
the fire, which flickered, crackled, and smoked — his
style flickers, crackles, and smokes — but he yearned
for the great flame which never broke out. He did
not sit at the table of the genuine creators, and his
ambition did not admit of his sitting modestly
among those who simply enjoy. Thus he was a
restless spirit, the taster of all intellectual dishes,
which were collected by the Germans from every
quarter and every age in the course of half a century.
Never really happy and satisfied, Herder was also



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 255

too often ill, and then at times envy sat by his bed,
and hypocrisy paid her visit as well. He always
had an air of being scarred and crippled, and he
lacked simple, stalwart manliness more completely
than any of the so-called " classical writers."



119.

Scent of Words. — Every word has its scent ;
there is a harmony and discord of scents, and so
too of words.

120.

The Far-Fetched Style. — The natural style
is an offence to the lover of the far-fetched style.

121.

A Vow. — I will never again read an author of
whom one can suspect that he wanted to make a
book, but only those writers whose thoughts un-
expectedly became a book.

122.

The Artistic Convention. — Three-fourths of
Homer is convention, and the same is the case with
all the Greek artists, who had no reason for falling
into the modern craze for originality. They had no
fear of convention, for after all convention was a
link between them and their public. Conventions
are the artistic means acquired for the understand-
ing of the hearer ; the common speech, learnt with
much toil, whereby the artist can really communi-
cate his ideas. All the more when he wishes, like



256 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

the Greek poets and musicians, to conquer at once
with each of his works (since he is accustomed to
compete publicly with one or two rivals), the first
condition is that he must be understood at once,
and this is only possible by means of convention.
What the artist devises beyond convention he offers
of his own free will and takes a risk, his success at
best resulting in the setting-up of a new conven-
tion. As a rule originality is marvelled at, some-
times even worshipped, but seldom understood. A
stubborn avoidance of convention means a desire
not to be understood. What, then, is the object of
the modern craze for originality ?



123.

Artists' Affectation of Scientific Me-
thod. — Schiller, like other German artists, fancied
that if a man had intellect he was entitled to impro-
vise even with the pen on all difficult subjects. So
there we see his prose essays — in every way a model
of how not to attack scientific questions of aesthetics
and ethics, and a danger for young readers who, in
their admiration for Schiller the poet, have not the
courage to think meanly of Schiller the thinker and
author. — The temptation to traverse for once the
forbidden paths, and to have his say in science as
well, is easy and pardonable in the artist. For
even the ablest artist from time to time finds his
handicraft and his workshop unendurable. This
temptation is so strong that it makes the artist show
all the world what no one wishes to see, that his little
chamber of thought is cramped and untidy. Why



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 257

not, indeed ? He does not live there. He proceeds
to show that the storeroom of his knowledge is
partly empty, partly filled with lumber. Why not,
indeed? This condition does not really become
the artist-child badly. In particular, the artist
shows that for the very easiest exercises of scientific
method, which are accessible even to beginners, his
joints are too stiff and untrained. Even of that he
need not really be ashamed ! On the other hand,
he often develops no mean art in imitating all the
mistakes, vices, and base pedantries that are prac-
tised in the scientific community, in the belief that
these belong to the appearance of the thing, if not to
the thing itself. This is the very point that is so
amusing in artists' writing, that the artist involun-
tarily acts as his vocation demands : he parodies
the scientific and inartistic natures. Towards science
he should show no attitude but that of parody, in
so far as he is an artist and only an artist.



124.

The Faust-Idea. — A little sempstress is se-
duced and plunged into despair : a great scholar of
all the four Faculties is the evil-doer. That cannot
have happened in the ordinary course, surely ? No,
certainly not ! Without the aid of the devil incar-
nate, the great scholar would never have achieved
the deed. — Is this really destined to be the greatest
German " tragic idea," as one hears it said among
Germans ? — But for Goethe even this idea was too
terrible. His kind heart could not avoid placing
the little sempstress, "the good soul that forgot

VOL. 11. R



258 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

itself but once," near to the saints, after her involun-
tary death. Even the great scholar, "the good
man " with " the dark impulse," is brought into
heaven in the nick of time, by a trick which is
played upon the devil at the decisive moment. In
heaven the lovers find themselves again. Goethe
once said that his nature was too conciliatory for
really tragic subjects.

125.

Are there "German Classics " ?— Sainte-
Beuve observes somewhere that the word " classic "
does not suit the genius of certain literatures. For
instance, nobody could talk seriously of " German
classics." — What do our German publishers, who
are about to add fifty more to the fifty German
classics we are told to accept, say to that ? Does
it not almost seem as if one need only have been
dead for the last thirty years, and lie a lawful prey
to the public,* in order to hear suddenly and unex-
pectedly the trumpet of resurrection as a " Classic " ?
And this in an age and a nation where at least five
out of the six great fathers of its literature are un-
doubtedly antiquated orbecomingantiquated — with-
out there being any need for the age or the nation to
be ashamed of this. For those writers have given
way before the strength of our time — let that be con-
sidered in all fairness ! — Goethe, as I have indicated,
I do not include. He belongs to a higher species
than " national literatures " : hence life, revival.

* The German copyright expires thirty years after publica-
tion. — Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 259

and decay do not enter into the reckoning in his
relations with his countrymen. He lived and now
lives but for the few ; for the majority he is nothing
but a flourish of vanity which is trumpeted from
time to time across the border into foreign ears.
Goethe, not merely a great and good man, but a
culture, is in German history an interlude without a
sequel. Who, for instance, would be able to point
to any trace of Goethe's influence in German politics
of the last seventy years (whereas the influence,
certainly of Schiller, and perhaps of Lessing, can be
traced in the political world ) ? But what of those
five others ? Klopstock, in a most honourable way,
became out of date even in his own lifetime, and so
completely that the meditative book of his later
years, The Republic of Learning, has never been
taken seriously from that day to this. Herder's
misfortune was that his writings were always either
new or antiquated. Thus for stronger and more
subtle minds (like Lichtenberg) even Herder's
masterpiece, his Ideas for the History of Mankind,
was in a way antiquated at the very moment of its
appearance. Wieland, who lived to the full and
made others live likewise, was clever enough to
anticipate by death the waning of his influence.
Lessing, perhaps, still lives to-day — but among a
young and ever younger band of scholars. Schiller
has fallen from the hands of young men into those
of boys, of all German boys. It is a well-known
sign of obsolescence when a book descends to
people of less and less mature age. — Well, what is
it that has thrust these five into the background,
so that well-educated men of affairs no longer read



2CO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

them ? A better taste, a riper knowledge, a higher
reverence for the real and the true : in other words,
the very virtues which these five (and ten or twenty
others of lesser repute) first re-planted in Germany,
and which now, like a mighty forest, cast over their
graves not only the shadow of awe, but something
of the shadow of oblivion. — But classical writers
are not planters of intellectual and literary virtues.
They bring those virtues to perfection and are their
highest luminous peaks, and being brighter, freer,
and purer than all that surrounds them, they remain
shining above the nations when the nations them-
selves perish. There may come an elevated stage
of humanity, in which the Europe of the peoples
is a dark, forgotten thing, but Europe lives on in
thirty books, very old but never antiquated — in the
classics.

126.

Interesting, but not Beautiful. — This
countryside conceals its meaning, but it has one
that we should like to guess. Everywhere that I
look, I read words and hints of words, but I do not
know where begins the sentence that solves the
riddle of all these hints. So I get a stiff neck in
trying to discover whether I should start reading
from this or that point.

127.

Against Innovators in Language. — The use
of neologisms or archaisms, the preference for the
rare and the bizarre, the attempt to enrich rather
than to limit the vocabulary, are always signs either



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 261

of an immature or of a corrupted taste. A noble
poverty but a masterly freedom within the limits of
that modest wealth distinguishes the Greek artists
in oratory. They wish to have less than the people
has — for the people is richest in old and new — but
they wish to have that little better. The reckoning
up of their archaic and exotic forms is soon done,
but we never cease marvelling if we have an eye
for their light and delicate manner in handling the
commonplace and apparently longoutworn elements
in word and phrase.

128.

Gloomy and Serious Authors. — He who
commits his sufferings to paper becomes a gloomy
author, but he becomes a serious one if he tells us
what he has suffered and why he is now enjoying a
pleasurable repose.

129.

Healthiness of Taste.— How is it that health
is less contagious than disease — generally, and par-
ticularly in matters of taste ? Or are there epidemics
of health ?

130.

A Resolution. — Never again to read a book
that is born and christened (with ink) at the same
moment.

131.
Improving our Ideas. — Improving our style
means improving our ideas, and nothing else. He



262 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

who does not at once concede this can never be
convinced of the point.

132.

Classical Books. — The weakest point in every
classical book is that it is written too much in the
mother tongue of its author.

133.
BAD BOOKS. — The book should demand pen, ink,
and desk, but usually it is pen, ink, and desk that
demand the book. That is why books are of so little
account at present.

134.
Presence of Sense.— When the public reflects
on paintings, it becomes a poet ; when on poems,
an investigator. At the moment when the artist
summons it it is always lacking in the right sense,
and accordingly in presence of sense, not in pre-
sence of mind.

135-
Choice Ideas. — The choice style of a momentous
period does not only select its words but its ideas—
and both from the customary and prevailing usage.
Venturesome ideas, that smell too fresh, are to the
maturer taste no less repugnant than new and reck-
less images and phrases. Later on both choice
ideas and choice words soon smack of mediocrity,
because the scent of the choice vanishes quickly, and
then nothing but the customary and commonplace
element is tasted.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 263
136.

Main Reason for Corruption of Style. —
The desire to display more sentiment than one
really feels for a thing corrupts style, in language
and in all art. All great art shows rather the
opposite tendency. Like every man of moral
significance, it loves to check emotion on its way
and not let it run its course to the very end. This
modesty of letting emotion but half appear is most
charly to be observed, for example, in Sophocles.
The features of sentiment seem to become beautified
vmen sentiment feigns to be more shy than it
really is.

137.
An Excuse for the Heavy Style. — The
lightly uttered phrase seldom falls on the ear with
the full weight of the subject. This is, however, due
to the bad training of the ear, which by education
must pass from what has hitherto been called music
to the school of the higher harmony — in other words,
to conversation.

138.

Bird's-Eye Views. — Here torrents rush from
every side into a ravine : their movement is so swift
and stormy, and carries the eye along so quickly,
that the bare or wooded mountain slopes around
seem not to sink down but to fly down. We are in
an agonised tension at the sight, as if behind all
this were hidden some hostile element, before which
all must fly, and against which the abyss alone gave
protection. This landscape cannot be painted, un-



264 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

less we hover above it like a bird in the open air.
Here for once the so-called bird's-eye view is not an
artistic caprice, but the sole possibility.



139.

Rash Comparisons. — If rash comparisons are
not proofs of the wantonness of the writer, they are
proofs of the exhaustion of his imagination. In any
case they bear witness to his bad taste.



140.

Dancing in Chains. — In the case of ever/
Greek artist, poet, or writer we must ask : What is
the new constraint which he imposes upon himself
and makes attractive to his contemporaries, so as to
find imitators ? For the thing called " invention "
(in metre, for example) is always a self-imposed
fetter of this kind. " Dancing in chains " — to make
that hard for themselves and then to spread a false
notion that it is easy — that is the trick that they
wish to show us. Even in Homer we may perceive
a wealth of inherited formulae and laws of epic
narration, within the circle of which he had to dance,
and he himself created new conventions for them
that came after. This was the discipline of the
Greek poets: first to impose upon themselves a
manifold constraint by means of the earlier poets ;
then to invent in addition a new constraint, to im-
pose it upon themselves and cheerfully to overcome
it, so that constraint and victory are perceived and
admired.






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 265
141.

Authors' Copiousness. — The last quality that
a good author acquires is copiousness : whoever has
it to begin with will never become a good author.
The noblest racehorses are lean until they are per-
mitted to rest from their victories.

142.

Wheezing Heroes. — Poets and artists who suffer
from a narrow chest of the emotions generally make
their heroes wheeze. They do not know what easy
breathing means.

143-
The Short-Sighted.*— The short-sighted are
the deadly foes of all authors who let themselves go.
These authors should know the wrath with which
these people shut the book in which they observe
that its creator needs fifty pages to express five
ideas. And the cause of their wrath is that they
have endangered what remains of their vision almost
without compensation. A short-sighted person
said, " All authors let themselves go." " Even the
HolyGhost?" "Even the Holy Ghost." But he had
a right to, for he wrote for those who had lost their
sight altogether.

144.

The Style of Immortality. — Thucydides and
Tacitus both imagined immortal, life for their works
when they executed them. That might be guessed

* Nietzsche himself was extremely short-sighted — Tr.



266 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

(if not known otherwise) from their style. The one
thought to give permanence to his ideas by salting
them, the other by boiling them down ; and neither,
it seems, made a miscalculation.

145.

Against Images and Similes. — By images and
similes we convince, but we do not prove. That is
why science has such a horror of images and similes.
Science does not want to convince or make plausible,
and rather seeks to provoke cold distrust by its mode
of expression, by the bareness of its walls. For
distrust is the touchstone for the gold of certainty.

146.

CAUTION. — In Germany, he who lacks thorough
knowledge should beware of writing. The good
German does not say in that case " he is ignorant,"
but " he is of doubtful character." — This hasty con-
clusion, by the way, does great credit to the Ger-
mans.

147.

Painted Skeletons. — Painted skeletons are
those authors who try to make up for their want of
flesh by artistic colourings.

148.

The Grand Style and Something Better.
— It is easier to learn how to write the grand style
than how to write easily and simply. The reasons
for this are inextricably bound up with morality.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 267
149.

Sebastian Bach. — In so far as we do not hear
Bach's music as perfect and experienced connois-
seurs of counterpoint and all the varieties of thefugal
style (and accordingly must dispense with real artistic
enjoyment), we shall feel in listening to his music
— in Goethe's magnificent phrase — as if "we were
present at God's creation of the world." In other
words, we feel here that something great is in the
makingbut not yet made — our mighty modern music,
which by conquering nationalities, the Church, and
counterpoint has conquered the world. In Bach
there is still too much crude Christianity, crude
Germanism, crude scholasticism. He stands on
the threshold of modern European music, but turns
from thence to look at the Middle Ages.

150.

HANDEL. — Handel, who in the invention of his
music was bold, original, truthful, powerful, inclined
to and akin to all the heroism of which a nation is
capable, often proved stiff, cold, nay even weary of
himself in composition. He applied a few well-tried
methods of execution, wrote copiously and quickly,
and was glad when he had finished — but that joy
was not the joy of God and other creators in the
eventide of their working day.

151.

Haydn. — So far as genius can exist in a man
who is merely good, Haydn had genius. He went



268 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

just as far as the limit which morality sets to in-
tellect, and only wrote music that has " no past."



152.

Beethoven and Mozart. — Beethoven's music
often appears like a deeply emotional meditation
on unexpectedly hearing once more a piece long
thought to be forgotten, "Tonal Innocence": it is
music about music. In the song of the beggar and
child in the street, in the monotonous airs of vagrant
Italians, in the dance of the village inn or in carnival
nights he discovers his melodies. He stores them
together like a bee, snatching here and there some
notes or a short phrase. To him these are hallowed
memories of " the better world," like the ideas of
Plato. — Mozart stands in quite a different relation
to his melodies. He finds his inspiration not in
hearing music but in gazing at life, at the most
stirring life of southern lands. He was always
dreaming of Italy, when he was not there.

153.
Recitative. — Formerly recitative was dry, but
now we live in the age of moist recitative. It has
fallen into the water, and the waves carry it whither-
soever they list.

154.

"Cheerful" Music. — If for a long time we

have heard no music, it then goes like a heavy

southern wine all too quickly into the blood and

leaves behind it a soul dazed with narcotics, half-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 269

awake, longing for sleep. This is particularly the
case with cheerful music, which inspires in us bit-
terness and pain, satiety and home-sickness to-
gether, and forces us to sip again and again as at
a sweetened draught of poison. The hall of gay,
noisy merriment then* seems to grow narrow, the
light to lose its brightness and become browner.
At last we feel as if this music were penetrating
to a prison where a poor wretch cannot sleep for
home-sickness.

155-
Franz Schubert. — Franz Schubert, inferior as
an artist to the other great musicians, had never-
theless the largest share of inherited musical wealth.
He spent it with a free hand and a kind heart, so
that for a few centuries musicians will continue to
nibble at his ideas and inspirations. In his works
we find a store of unused inventions ; the greatness
of others will lie in making use of those inventions.
If Beethoven may be called the ideal listener for
a troubadour, Schubert has a right to be called the
ideal troubadour.

1 5 6.

Modern Musical Execution.— Great tragic
or dramatic execution of music acquires its character
by imitating the gesture of the great sinner, such
as Christianity conceives and desires him : the slow-
stepping, passionately brooding man, distracted by
the agonies of conscience, now flying in terror,
now clutching with delight, now standing still in
despair — and all the other marks of great sinful-



270 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ness. Only on the Christian assumption that all
men are great sinners and do nothing but sin could
we justify the application of this style of execution
to all music. So far, music would be the reflection
of all the actions and impulses of man, and would
continually have to express by gestures the lan-
guage of the great sinner. At such a performance,
a listener who was not enough of a Christian to
understand this logic might indeed cry out in hor-
ror, " For the love of Heaven, how did sin find its
way into music ? "

157.

Felix Mendelssohn.— Felix Mendelssohn's
music is the music of the good taste that enjoys
all the good things that have ever existed. It
always points behind. How could it have much
"in front," much of a future? — But did he want
it to have a future? He possessed a virtue rare
among artists, that of gratitude without arrih'e-
pense'e. This virtue, too, always points behind.

158.

A Mother of Arts. — In our sceptical age, real
devotion requires almost a brutal heroism of am-
bition. Fanatical shutting of the eyes and bending
of the knee no longer suffice. Would it not be pos-
sible for ambition — in its eagerness to be the last
devotee of all the ages — to become the begetter of a
final church music, as it has been the begetter of the
final church architecture ? (They call it the Jesuit
style.)



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 27 1
159.

Freedom in Fetters— a Princely Freedom.
— Chopin, the last of the modern musicians, who
gazed at and worshipped beauty, like Leopardi;
Chopin, the Pole, the inimitable (none that came
before or after him has a right to this name) —
Chopin had the same princely punctilio in conven-
tion that Raphael shows in the use of the simplest
traditional colours. The only difference is that
Chopin applies them not to colour but to melodic
and rhythmic traditions. He admitted the validity
of these traditions because he was born under the
sway of etiquette. But in these fetters he plays and
dances as the freest and daintiest of spirits, and, be
it observed, he does not spurn the chain.

160.

Chopin's Barcarolle. — Almost all states and
modes of life have a moment of rapture, and good
artists know how to discover that moment. Such
a moment there is even in life by the seashore — that
dreary, sordid, unhealthy existence, dragged out in
the neighbourhood of a noisy and covetous rabble.
This moment of rapture Chopin in his Barcarolle
expressed in sound so supremely that Gods them-
selves, when they heard it, might yearn to lie long
summer evenings in a boat.

161.

Robert Schumann. — "The Stripling," as the
romantic songsters of Germany and France of the



272 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

first three decades of this century imagined him —
this stripling was completely translated into song
and melody by Robert Schumann, the eternal
youth, so long as he felt himself in full possession
of his powers. There are indeed moments when
his music reminds one of the eternal " old maid."

162.

Dramatic Singers. — "Why does this beggar
sing? " " Probably he does not know how to wail."
" Then he does right." But our dramatic singers,
who wail because they do not know how to sing
— are they also in the right ?

163.

Dramatic Music. — For him who does not see
what is happening on the stage, dramatic music is
a monstrosity, just as the running commentary to
a lost text is a monstrosity. Such music requires
us to have ears where our eyes are. This, however,
is doing violence to Euterpe, who, poor Muse, wants
to have her eyes and ears where the other Muses
have theirs.

164.

Victory and Reasonableness. — Unfortu-
nately in the aesthetic wars, which artists provoke
by their works and apologias for their works, just as
is the case in real war, it is might and not reason that
decides. All the world now assumes as a historical
fact that, in his dispute with Piccini, Gluckwas in the
right. At any rate, he was victorious, and had might
on his side.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 273
165.

Of the Principle of Musical Execution. —
Do the modern musical performers really believe
that the supreme law of their art is to give every
piece as much high-relief as is possible, and to make
it speak at all costs a dramatic language? Is not
this principle, when applied for example to Mozart,
a veritable sin against the spirit — the gay, sunny,
airy, delicate spirit — of Mozart, whose seriousness
was of a kindly and not awe-inspiring order, whose
pictures do not try to leap from the wall and drive
away the beholder in panic ? Or do you think that
all Mozart's music is identical with the statue-music
in Don Juan} And not only Mozart's, but all
music? — You reply that the advantage of your
principle lies in its greater effect. You would be
right if there did not remain the counter-question,
" On whom has the effect operated, and on whom
should an artist of the first rank desire to produce
his effect ? " Never on the populace ! Never on
the immature ! Never on the morbidly sensitive !
Never on the diseased ! And above all — never on
the blase \

166.

The Music of To -Day.— This ultra-modern
music, with its strong lungs and weak nerves, is
frightened above all things of itself.

167.

Where Music is at Home.— Music reaches its
high-water mark only among men who have not the
vol. 11. S



274 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ability or the right to argue. Accordingly, its chief
promoters are princes, whose aim is that there should
be not much criticism nor even much thought in
their neighbourhood. Next come societies which,
under some pressure or other (political or religious),
are forced to become habituated to silence, and
so feel all the greater need of spells to charm away
emotional ennui — these spells being generally eternal
love-making and eternal music. Thirdly, we must
reckon whole nations in which there is no " society,"
but all the greater number of individuals with a
bent towards solitude, mystical thinking, and a re-
verence for all that is inexpressible ; these are the
genuine " musical souls." The Greeks, as a nation
delighting in talking and argument, accordingly put
up with music only as an hors d'ceuvre to those arts
which really admit of discussion and dispute. About
music one can hardly even think clearly. The Py-
thagoreans, who in so many respects were exceptional
Greeks, are said to have been great musicians. This
was the school that invented a five-years' silence,*
but did not invent a dialectic.



168.

Sentimentality in Music. — We may be ever
so much in sympathy with serious and profound
music, yet nevertheless, or perhaps all the more for
that reason, we shall at occasional moments be over-
powered, entranced, and almost melted away by its

* In the sixth century B.C. Pythagoras founded at Croton a
" school " somewhat resembling a monastic order. Among the
ordeals for novitiates was enforced silence for five years. — Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 275

opposite — I mean, by those simple Italian operatic
airs which, in spite of all their monotony of rhythm
and childishness of harmony, seem at times to sing
to us like the very soul of music. Admit this or not
as you please, you Pharisees of good taste, it is so,
and it is my present task to propound the riddle
that it is so, and to nibble a little myself at the
solution. — In childhood's days we tasted the honey
of many things for the first time. Never was honey
so good as then ; it seduced us to life, into abundant
life, in the guise of the first spring, the first flower,
the first butterfly, the first friendship. Then — per-
haps in our ninth year or so — we heard our first
music, and this was the first that we understood ;
thus the simplest and most childish tunes, that were
not much more than a sequel to the nurse's lullaby
and the strolling fiddler's tune, were our first experi-
ence. (For even the most trifling " revelations " of
art need preparation and study ; there is no " im-
mediate" effect of art, whatever charming fables
the philosophers may tell.) Our sensation on hear-
ing these Italian airs is associated with those first
musical raptures, the strongest of our lives. The
bliss of childhood and its flight, the feeling that our
most precious possession can never be brought back,
all this moves the chords of the soul more strongly
than the most serious and profound music can move
them. — This mingling of aesthetic pleasure with moral
pain, which nowadays it is customary to call (rather
too haughtily, I think) " sentimentality " — it is the
mood of Faust at the end of the first scene — this
" sentimentality " of the listener is all to the advan-
tage of Italian music. It is a feeling which the ex-



276 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






perienced connoisseurs in art, the pure "aesthetes," like
to ignore. — Moreover, almost all music has a magical
effect only when we hear it speak the language of
our own past. Accordingly, it seems to the layman
that all the old music is continually growing better,
and that all the latest is of little value. For the latter
arouses no " sentimentality," that most essential
element of happiness, as aforesaid, for every man
who cannot approach this art with pure aesthetic
enjoyment.

169.

As Friends of Music. — Ultimately we are and
remain good friends with music, as we are with the
light of the moon. Neither, after all, tries to sup-
plant the sun : they only want to illumine our nights
to the best of their powers. Yet we may jest and
laugh at them, may we not ? Just a little, at least,
and from time to time ? At the man in the moon,
at the woman in the music ?

170.

Art in an Age of Work. — We have the con-
science of an industrious epoch. This debars us
from devoting our best hours and the best part
of our days to art, even though that art be the
greatest and worthiest. Art is for us a matter of
leisure, of recreation, and we consecrate to it the
residue of our time and strength. This is the car-
dinal fact that has altered the relation of art to life.
When art makes its great demands of time and
strength upon its recipients, it has to battle against
the conscience of the industrious and efficient, it is



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 277

relegated to the idle and conscienceless, who, by
their very nature, are not exactly suited to great
art, and consider its claims arrogant. It might,
therefore, be all over with art, since it lacks air and
the power to breathe. But perhaps the great art
attempts, by a sort of coarsening and disguising, to
make itself at home in that other atmosphere, or at
least to put up with it — an atmosphere which is really
a natural element only for petty art, the art of re-
creation, of pleasant distraction. This happens now-
adays almost everywhere. Even the exponents of
great art promise recreation and distraction ; even
they address themselves to the exhausted ; even they
demand from him the evening hours of his working-
day — just like the artists of the entertaining school,
who are content to smooth the furrowed brow and
brighten the lack-lustre eye. What, then, are the
devices of their mightier brethren ? These have in
their medicine-chests the most powerful excitants,
which might give a shock even to a man half-dead :
they can deafen you, intoxicate you, make you
shudder, or bring tears to your eyes. By this
means they overpower the exhausted man and
stimulate him for one night to an over-lively con-
dition, to an ecstasy of terror and delight. This
great art, as it now lives in opera, tragedy, and music
— have we a right to be angry with it, because of
its perilous fascination, as we should be angry with
a cunning courtesan ? Certainly not. It would far
rather live in the pure element of morning calm, and
would far rather make its appeal to the fresh, ex-
pectant, vigorous morning-soul of the beholder or
listener. Let us be thankful that it prefers living



278 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






thus to vanishing altogether. But let us also con-
fess that an era that once more introduces free and
complete high-days and holidays into life will have
no use for our great art.

171.
The Employees of Science and the Others.
— Really efficient and successful men of science might
be collectively called " The Employees." If in youth
theiracumen is sufficiently practised, their memoryis
full, and hand and eye have acquired sureness, they
are appointed by an older fellow-craftsman to a
scientific position where their qualities may prove
useful. Later on, when they have themselves gained
an eye for the gaps and defects in their science, they
place themselves in whatever position they are needed .
These persons all exist for the sake of science. But
there are rarer spirits, spirits that seldom succeed
or fully mature — " for whose sake science exists "
— at least, in their view. They are often unpleasant,
conceited, or cross-grained men, but almost always
prodigies to a certain extent. They are neither
employees nor employers; they make use of what
those others have worked out and established,
with a certain princely carelessness and with little
and rare praise — just as if the others belonged
to a lower order of beings. Yet they possess
the same qualities as their fellow-workers, and
that sometimes in a less developed form. More-
over, they have a peculiar limitation, from which
the others are free; this makes it impossible to
put them into a place and to see in them useful
tools. They can only live in their own air and on



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 279

their own soil. This limitation suggests to them
what elements of a science " are theirs n — in other
words, what they can carry home into their house
and atmosphere : they think that they are always
collecting their scattered "property." If they are
prevented from building at their own nest, they
perish like shelterless birds. The loss of freedom
causes them to wilt away. If they show, like their
colleagues, a fondness for certain regions of science,
it is always only regions where the fruits and seeds
necessary to them can thrive. What do they care
whether science, taken as a whole, has untilled or
badly tilled regions? They lack all impersonal
interest in a scientific problem. As they are them-
selves personal through and through, all their know-
ledge and ideas are remoulded into a person, into
a living complexity, with its parts interdependent,
overlapping, jointly nurtured, and with a peculiar
atmosphere and scent as a whole. — Such natures,
with their system of personal knowledge, produce
the illusion that a science (or even the whole of
philosophy) is finished and has reached its goal.
The life in their system works this magic, which at
times has been fatal to science and deceptive to the
really efficient workers above described, and at other
times, when drought and exhaustion prevailed, has
acted as a kind of restorative, as if it were the air
of a cool, refreshing resting-place. — These men are
usually called philosophers.

172.
Recognition of Talent. — As I went through
the village of S., a boy began to crack his whip with



28o

all his might— he had made great progress in this art,
and he knew it. I threw him a look of recognition
— in reality it hurt me cruelly. We do the same in
our recognition of many of the talents. We do good
to them when they hurt us.

173-
Laughing and Smiling.— The more joyful and
assured the mind becomes, the more man loses the
habit of loud laughter. In compensation, there is
an intellectual smile continually bubbling up in him,
a sign of his astonishment at the innumerable con-
cealed delights of a good existence.

174.
The Talk of Invalids.— Just as in spiritual
grief we tear our hair, strike our foreheads, lacerate
our cheeks or even (like GEdipus) gouge our eyes
out, so against violent physical pain we call to our
aid a bitter, violent emotion, through the recollec-
tion of slanderous and malignant people, through
the denigration of our future, through the sword -
pricks and acts of malice which we mentally direct
against the absent. And at times it is true that
one devil drives out another — but then we have the
other. — Hence a different sort of talk, tending to
alleviate pain, should be recommended invalids :
reflections upon the kindnesses and courtesies that
can be performed towards friend and foe.

175.
Mediocrity as a Mask. — Mediocrity is the
happiest mask which the superior mind can wear,



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 28 1

because it does not lead the great majority — that
is, the mediocre — to think that there is any disguise.
Yet the superior mind assumes the mask just for
their sake — so as not to irritate them, nay, often
from a feeling of pity and kindness.

176.

The Patient. — The pine tree seems to listen,
the fir tree to wait, and both without impatience.
They do not give a thought to the petty human
being below who is consumed by his impatience
and his curiosity.

177.

The Best Joker. — My favourite joke is the one
that takes the place of a heavy and rather hesitat-
ing idea, and that at once beckons with its finger
and winks its eye.

178.

The Accessaries of all Reverence. — Wher-
ever the past is revered, the over-cleanly and over-
tidy people should not be admitted. Piety does not
feel content without a little dust, dirt, and dross.

179.

The Great Danger of Savants. — It is just
the most thorough and profound savants who are
in peril of seeing their life's goal set ever lower
and lower, and, with a feeling of this in their minds,
to become ever more discouraged and more unen-
durable in the latter half of their lives. At first they
plunge into their science with spacious hopes and
set themselves daring tasks, the ends of which are



282 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






already anticipated by their imaginations. Then
there are moments as in the lives of the great
maritime discoverers — knowledge, presentiment, and
power raise each other higher and higher, until a new
shore first dawns upon the eye in the far distance.
But now the stern man recognises more and more
how important it is that the individual task of the
inquirer should be limited as far as possible, so
that it may be entirely accomplished and the in-
tolerable waste of force from which earlier periods
of science suffered may be avoided. In those days
everything was done ten times over, and then the
eleventh always had the last and best word. Yet
the more the savant learns and practises this art of
solving riddles in their entirety, the more pleasure
he finds in so doing. But at the same time his de-
mands upon what is here called "entirety" grow
more exacting. He sets aside everything that must
remain in this sense incomplete, he acquires a dis-
gust and an acute scent for the half-soluble — for
all that can only give a kind of certainty in a
general and indefinite form. His youthful plans
crumble away before his eyes. There remains
scarcely anything but a few little knots, in unty-
ing which the master now takes his pleasure and
shows his strength. Then, in the midst of all this
useful, restless activity, he, now grown old, is sud-
denly then often overcome by a deep misgiving, a
sort of torment of conscience. He looks upon
himself as one changed, as if he were diminished,
humbled, transformed into a dexterous dwarf \ he
grows anxious as to whether mastery in small
matters be not a convenience, an escape from the



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 283

summons to greatness in lifeand form. But he can-
not pass beyond any longer — the time for that has
gone by.

180.

Teachers in the Age of Books. — Now that
self-education and mutual education are becoming
more widespread, the teacher in his usual form must
become almost unnecessary. Friends eager to learn,
who wish to master some branch of knowledge to-
gether, find in our age of books a shorter and more
natural way than " school " and " teachers."

181.

Vanity as the Greatest Utility.— Origin-
ally the strong individual uses not only Nature but
even societies and weaker individuals as objects of
rapine. He exploits them, so far as he can, and
then passes on. As he lives from hand to mouth,
alternating between hunger and superfluity, he kills
more animals than he can eat, and robs and mal-
treats men more than is necessary. His manifesta-
tion of power is at the same time one of revenge
against his cramped and worried existence. Further-
more, he wishes to be held more powerful than he
is, and thus misuses opportunities ; the accretion of
fear that he begets being an accretion of power. He
soon observes that he stands or falls not by what
he is but by what he is thought to be. Herein lies
the origin of vanity. The man of power seeks by
every means to increase others' faith in his power. —
The thralls who tremble before him and serve him
know, for their part, that they are worth just so



284 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



much as they appear to him to be worth, and so
they work with an eye to this valuation rather than
to their own self-satisfaction. We know vanity only
in its most weakened forms, in its idealisations and
its small doses, because we live in a late and very
emasculated state of society. Originally vanity is the
great utility, the strongest means of preservation.
And indeed vanity will be greater, the cleverer the
individual, because an increase in the belief in power
is easier than an increase in the power itself, but
only for him who has intellect or (as must be the
case under primitive conditions) who is cunning and
crafty.

182.
Weather-Signs of Culture. — There are so
few decisive weather-signs of culture that we must
be glad to have at least one unfailing sign at hand
for use in house and garden. To test whether a
man belongs to us (I mean to the free spirits) or
not, we must test his sentiments regarding Christi-
anity. If he looks upon Christianity with other than
a critical eye, we turn our backs to him, for he brings
us impure air and bad weather. — It is no longer our
task to teach such men what a sirocco wind is. They
have Moses and the prophets of weather and of
enlightenment* If they will not listen to these,
then

183.
There is a Proper Time for Wrath and
Punishment. — Wrath and punishment are our in-

* In the German Aufkl'driing there is a play on the sense
" clearing up " (of weather) and " enlightenment." — Tr.



iH on






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 285

heritance from the animals. Man does not become
of age until he has restored to the animals this gift
of the cradle. — Herein lies buriedoneof themightiest
ideas that men can have, the idea of a progress of
all progresses. — Let us go forward together a few
millenniums, my friends ! There is still reserved for
mankind a great deal of joy, the very scent of which
has not yet been wafted to the men of our day !
Indeed, we may promise ourselves this joy, nay
summon and conjure it up as a necessary thing, so
long as the development of human reason does not
stand still. Some day we shall no longer be recon-
ciled to the logical sin that lurks in all wrath and
punishment, whether exercised by the individual or
by society — some day, when head and heart have
learnt to live as near together as they now are far
apart. That they no longer stand so far apart as
they did originally is fairly palpable from a glance
at the whole course of humanity. The individual
who can review a life of introspective work will be-
come conscious of the rapprochement arrived at, with
a proud delight at the distance he has bridged, in
order that he may thereupon venture upon more
ample hopes.

184.

Origin of Pessimists.— A snack of good food
often decides whether we are to look to the future
with hollow eye or in hopeful mood. The same
influence extends to the very highest and most
intellectual states. Discontent and reviling of the
world are for the present generation an inheritance
from starveling ancestors. Even in our artists and



286 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

poets we often notice that, however exuberant their
life, they are not of good birth, and have often, from
oppressed and ill-nourished ancestors, inherited in
their blood and brain much that comes out as the
subject and even the conscious colouring of their
work. The culture of the Greeks is a culture of men
of wealth, in fact, inherited wealth. For a few centuries
they lived better than we do (better in every sense,
in particular far more simply in food and drink).
Then the brain finally became so well-stored and
subtle, and the blood flowed so quickly, like a joyous,
clear wine, that the best in them came to light no
longer as gloomy, distorted, and violent, but full of
beauty and sunshine.

185.

Of Reasonable Death. — Which is more reason-
able, to stop the machine when the works have done
the task demanded of them, or to let it run on until
it stands still of its own accord — in other words, is
destroyed ? Is not the latter a waste of the cost of
upkeep, a misuse of the strength and care of those
who serve? Are men not here throwing away that
which would be sorely needed elsewhere ? Is not a
kind of contempt of the machines propagated, in that
many of them are so uselessly tended and kept up? —
I am speaking of involuntary (natural) and voluntary
(reasonable) death. Natural death is independent
of all reason and is really an irrational death, in
which the pitiable substance of the shell determines
how long the kernel is to exist or not ; in which,
accordingly, the stunted, diseased and dull-witted



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 287

jailer is lord, and indicates the moment at which
his distinguished prisoner shall die. Natural death
is the suicide of nature — in other words, the annihi-
lation of the most rational being through the most
irrational element that is attached thereto. Only
through religious illumination can the reverse ap-
pear; for then, as is equitable, the higher reason
(God) issues its orders, which the lower reason has
to obey. Outside religious thought natural death
is not worth glorifying. The wise dispensation and
disposal of death belongs to that now quite incom-
prehensible and immoral-sounding morality of the
future, the dawn of which it will be an ineffable de-
light to behold.

186.

Retrograde Influences.— All criminals force
society back to earlier stages of culture than that
in which they are placed for the time being. Their
influence is retrograde. Let us consider the tools
that society must forge and maintain for its defence:
the cunning detectives, the jailers, the hangmen.
Nor should we forget the public counsel for pro-
secution and defence. Finally we may ask our-
selves whether the judge himself and punishment
and the whole legal procedure are not oppressive
rather than elevating in their reaction upon all who
are not law-breakers. For we shall never succeed
in arraying self-defence and revenge in the garb of
innocence, and so long as men are used and sacri-
ficed as a means to the end of society, all loftier
humanity will deplore this necessity.



288 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

I8 7 .
War as a Remedy. — For nations that are grow-
ing weak and contemptible war may be prescribed
as a remedy, if indeed they really want to go on
living. National consumption as well as individual
admits of a brutal cure. The eternal will to live
and inability to die is, however, in itself already a
sign of senility of emotion. The more fully and
thoroughly we live, the more ready we are to sacri-
fice life for a single pleasurable emotion. A people
that lives and feels in this wise has no need of war.

188.

Intellectual and Physical Transplanta-
tion as Remedies. — The different cultures are so
many intellectual climates, every one of which is
peculiarly harmful or beneficial to this or that
organism. History as a whole, as the knowledge
of different cultures, is the science of remedies, but
not the science of the healing art itself. We still
need a physician who can make use of these
remedies, in order to send every one — temporarily
or permanently — to the climate that just suits
him. To live in the present, within the limits of a
single culture, is insufficient as a universal remedy :
too many highly useful kinds of men, who cannot
breathe freely in this atmosphere, would perish.
With the aid of history we must give them air and
try to preserve them : even men of lower cultures
have their value. — Add to this cure of intellects that
humanity, on considerations of bodily health, must
strive to discover by means of a medical geography






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 289

what kinds of degeneration and disease are caused
by each region of the earth, and conversely, what
ingredients of health the earth affords : and then,
gradually, nations, families, and individuals must be
transplanted long and permanently enough for them
to become masters of their inherited physical in-
firmities. The whole world will finally be a series
of sanatoria.

189.

Reason and the Tree of Mankind. — What
you all fear in your senile short-sightedness, regard-
ing the over-population of the world, gives the more
hopeful a mighty task. Man is some day to become
a tree overshadowing the whole earth, with millions
upon millions of buds that shall all grow to fruits
side by side, and the earth itself shall be prepared
for the nourishment of this tree. That the shoot,
tiny as yet, may increase in sap and strength ; that
the sap may flow in countless channels for the
nutrition of the whole and the parts — from these
and similar tasks we must derive our standard for
measuring whether a man of to-day is useful or
worthless. The task is unspeakably great and ad-
venturous : let us all contribute our share to pre-
vent the tree from rotting before its time ! The
historically trained mind will no doubt succeed in
calling up the human activities of all the ages before
its eyes, as the community of ants with its cunningly
wrought mounds stands before our eyes. Super-
ficially judged, mankind as a whole, like ant-kind,
might admit of our speaking of " instinct." On a
closer examination we observe how whole nations,
vol. 11, T



290 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

nay whole centuries, take pains to discover and test
new means of benefiting the great mass of humanity,
and thus finally the great common fruit-tree of
the world. Whatever injury the individual nations
or periods may suffer in this testing process, they
have each become wise through this injury, and
from them the tide of wisdom slowly pours over
the principles of whole races and whole epochs.
Ants too go astray and make blunders. Through
the folly of its remedies, mankind may well go to
rack and ruin before the proper time. There is no
sure guiding instinct for the former or the latter.
Rather must we boldly face the great task of pre-
paring the earth for a plant of the most ample and
joyous fruitfulness — a task set by reason to reason !



190.

The Praise of Disinterestedness and its
ORIGIN. — Between two neighbouring chieftains
there was a long-standing quarrel : they laid waste
each other's territories, stole cattle, and burnt down
houses, with an indecisive result on the whole, be-
cause their power was fairly equal. A third, who
from the distant situation of his property was able
to keep aloof from these feuds, yet had reason to
dread the day when one of the two neighbours
should gain a decisive preponderance, at last inter-
vened between the combatants with ceremonial
goodwill. Secretly he lent a heavy weight to
his peace proposal by giving either to understand
that he would henceforth join forces with the other
against the one who strove to break the peace.






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 291

They met in his presence, they hesitatingly placed
into his hand the hands that had hitherto been the
tools and only too often the causes of hatred — and
then they really and seriously tried to keep the
peace. Either saw with astonishment how suddenly
his prosperity and his comfort increased ; how he
now had as neighbour a dealer ready to buy and
sell instead of a treacherous or openly scornful
evil-doer; how even, in unforeseen troubles, they
could reciprocally save each other from distress,
instead of, as before, making capital out of this dis-
tress of his neighbour and enhancing it to the highest
degree. It even seemed as if the human type had
improved in both countries, for the eyes had become
brighter, the forehead had lost its wrinkles ; all now
felt confidence in the future — and nothing is more
advantageous for the souls and bodies of men than
this confidence. They saw each other every year
on the anniversary of the alliance, the chieftains as
well as their retinue, and indeed before the eyes of
the mediator, whose mode of action they admired
and revered more and more, the greater the profit
that they owed to him became. Then his mode of
action was called disinterested. They had looked
far too fixedly at the profit they had reaped them-
selves hitherto to see anything more of their neigh-
bour's method of dealing than that his condition in
consequence of this had not altered so much as their
own ; he had rather remained the same : and thus it
appeared that the former had not had his profit in
view. For the first time people said to themsel-
ves that disinterestedness was a virtue. It is true
that in minor private matters similar circumstances



292 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

had arisen, but men only had eyes for this virtue
when it was depicted on the walls in a large script
that was legible to the whole community. Moral
qualities are not recognised as virtues, endowed
with names, held in esteem, and recommended as
worthy of acquisition until the moment when they
have visibly decided the happiness and destiny of
whole societies. For then the loftiness of senti-
ment and the excitation of the inner creative forces
is in many so great, that offerings are brought to
this quality, offerings from the best of what each
possesses. At its feet the serious man lays his
seriousness, the dignified man his dignity, women
their gentleness, the young all the wealth of hope
and futurity that in them lies; the poet lends it
words and names, sets it marching in the procession
of similar beings, gives it a pedigree, and finally, as
is the way of artists, adores the picture of his fancy
as a new godhead — he even teaches others to adore.
Thus in the end, with the co-operation of universal
love and gratitude, a virtue becomes, like a statue,
a repository of all that is good and honourable, a
sort of temple and divine personage combined. It
appears thenceforward as an individual virtue, as
an absolute entity, which it was not before, and
exercises the power and privileges of a sanctified
super-humanity. — In the later days of Greece the
cities were full of such deified human abstractions
(if one may so call them). The nation, in its own
fashion, had set up a Platonic " Heaven of Ideas "
on earth, and I do not think that its inhabitants
were felt to be less alive than any of the old
Homeric divinities.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 293
191.

Days of Darkness. — "Days of Darkness" is
the name given in Norway to the period when the
sun remains below the horizon the whole day long.
The temperature then falls slowly but continually. —
A fine simile for all thinkers for whom the sun of
the human future is temporarily eclipsed.

192.

The Philosophy of Luxury. — A garden, figs,
a little cheese, and three or four good friends — that
was the luxury of Epicurus.

193-
The Epochs of Life. — The real epochs of life
are those brief periods of cessation midway between
the rise and decline of a dominating idea or emotion.
Here once again there is satisfaction : all the rest is
hunger and thirst — or satiety.

194.

Dreams. — Our dreams, if for once in a way they
succeed and are complete — generally a dream is a
bungled piece of work — are symbolic concatenations
of scenes and images in place of a narrative poeti-
cal language. They paraphrase our experiences or
expectations or relations with poetic boldness and
definiteness, so that in the morning we are always
astonished at ourselves when we remember the
nature of our dream. In dreams we use up too
much artistry — and hence are often too poor in
artistry in the daytime.



294 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






195.

Nature and Science. — As in nature, so in
science the worse and less fertile soils are first
cultivated — because the means that science in its
early stages has at command are fairly sufficient for
this purpose. The working of the most fertile soils
requires an enormous, carefully developed, perse-
vering method, tangible individual results, and an
organised body of well-trained workers. All these
are found together only at a late stage. — Impa-
tience and ambition often grasp too early at these
most fertile soils, but the results are then from the
first null and void. In nature such losses would
usually be avenged by the starvation of the settlers.

196.

The Simple Life. — A simple mode of life is
nowadays difficult, requiring as it does far more re-
flection and gift for invention than even very clever
people possess. The most honourable will perhaps
still say, " I have not the time for such lengthy
reflection. The simple life is for me too lofty a goal :
I will wait till those wiser than I have discovered
it."

197.

Peaks and Needle-Points.— The poor fertility,
the frequent celibacy, and in general the sexual
coldness of the highest and most cultivated spirits,
as that of the classes to which they belong, is
essential in human economy. Intelligence recog-
nises and makes use of the fact that at an acme of



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 295

intellectual development the danger of a neurotic
offspring is very great. Such men are the peaks of
mankind — they ought no longer to run out into
needle-points.

198.

Natura non facit saltum. — However strongly
man may develop upwards and seem to leap from
one contradiction to another, a close observation
will reveal the dovetails where the new building
grows out of the old. This is the biographer's task :
he must reflect upon his subject on the principle
that nature takes no jumps.

199.

Clean, but He who clothes himself with

rags washed clean dresses cleanly, to be sure, but is
still ragged.

200.

The Solitary Speaks. — In compensation for
much disgust, disheartenment, boredom — such as
a lonely life without friends, books, duties, and
passions must involve — we enjoy those short spans
of deep communion with ourselves and with Nature.
He who fortifies himselfcompletely against boredom
fortifies himself against himself too. He will never
drink the most powerful elixir from his own inner-
most spring.

201.

False Renown.— I hate those so-called natural
beauties which really have significance only through
science, especially geographical science, but are in-



296 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

significant in an aesthetic sense : for example, the
view of Mont Blanc from Geneva. This is an in-
significant thing without the auxiliary mental joy of
science : the nearer mountains are all more beautiful
and fuller of expression, but " not nearly so high,"
adds that absurd depreciatory science. The eye
here contradicts science : how can it truly rejoice in
the contradiction ?



202.

Those that Travel for Pleasure. — Like
animals, stupid and perspiring, they climb moun-
tains : people forgot to tell them that there were
fine views on the way.

203.

Too Much and Too Little.— Men nowadays
live too much and think too little. They have
hunger and dyspepsia together, and become thinner
and thinner, however much they eat. He who now
says " Nothing has happened to me " is a blockhead.

204.

End AND Goal. — Not every end is the goal.
The end of a melody is not its goal, and yet if
a melody has not reached its end, it has also not
reached its goal. A parable.

205.

Neutrality of Nature on a Grand Scale.
—The neutrality of Nature on a grand scale (in



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 297

mountain, sea, forest, and desert) is pleasing, but
only for a brief space. Afterwards we become im-
patient. "Have they all nothing to say to us}
Do we not exist so far as they are concerned?"
There arises a feeling that a lese-majeste is com-
mitted against humanity.

206.

Forgetting our Purpose. — In a journey we
commonly forget its goal. Almost every vocation
is chosen and entered upon as means to an end, but
is continued as the ultimate end. Forgetting our
purpose is the most frequent form of folly.



207.

Solar Orbit of an Idea.— When an idea is
just rising on the horizon, the soul's temperature is
usually very low. Gradually the idea develops in
warmth, and is hottest (that is to say, exerts its
greatest influence) when belief in the idea is already
on the wane.

208.

HOW TO HAVE EVERY MAN AGAINST YOU. —
If some one now dared to say, " He that is not
for me is against me," he would at once have all
against him. — This sentiment does credit to our era.

209.

Being Ashamed of Wealth.— Our age endures
only a single species of rich men — those who are



298 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

ashamed of their wealth. If we hear it said of
any one that he is very rich, we at once feel a similar
sentiment to that experienced at the sight of a re-
pulsively swollen invalid, one suffering from diabetes
or dropsy. We must with an effort remember our
humanity, in order to go about with this rich man
in such a way that he does not notice our feeling of
disgust. But as soon as he prides himself at all on
his wealth, our feelings are mingled with an almost
compassionate surprise at such a high degree of
human unreason. We would fain raise our hands
to heaven and cry, " Poor deformed and over-
burdened creature, fettered a hundredfold, to whom
every hour brings or may bring something un-
pleasant, in whose frame twitches every event that
occurs in scores of countries, how can you make us
believe that you feel at ease in your position ? If
you appear anywhere in public, we know that it
is a sort of running the gauntlet amid countless
glances that have for you only cold hate or im-
portunity or silent scorn. You may earn more
easily than others, but it is only a superfluous
earning, which brings little joy, and the guarding
of what you have earned is now, at any rate, a more
troublesome business than any toilsome process of
earning. You are continually suffering, because you
are continually losing. What avails it you that they
are always injecting you with fresh artificial blood ?
That does not relieve the pain of those cupping-
glasses that are fixed, for ever fixed, on your neck ! —
But, to be quite fair to you, it is difficult or perhaps
impossible for you not to be rich. You must guard,
you must earn more ; the inherited bent of your



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 299

character is the yoke fastened upon you. But do
not on that account deceive us — be honestly and
visibly ashamed of the yoke you wear, as in your
soul you are weary and unwilling to wear it. This
shame is no disgrace."



210.

Extravagant Presumptions. — There are men
so presumptuous that they can only praise a great-
ness which they publicly admire by representing it
as steps and bridges that lead to themselves.



21 X.

On the Soil of Insult. — He who wishes to
deprive men of a conception is generally not
satisfied with refuting it and drawing out of it the
illogical worm that resides within. Rather, when
the worm has been killed, does he throw the whole
fruit as well into the mire, in order to make it
ignoble in men's sight and to inspire disgust. Thus
he thinks that he has found a means of making the
usual "third-day resurrection" of conceptions an
impossibility. — He is wrong, for on the very soil of
insult, in the midst of the filth, the kernel of the
conception soon produces new seeds. — The right
thing then, is not to scorn and bespatter what one
wishes finally to remove, but to lay it tenderly on
ice again and again, having regard to the fact that
conceptions are very tenacious of life. Here we
must act according to the maxim : " One refutation
is no refutation."



300 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

212.

The Lot of Morality.— Since spiritual bond-
age is being relaxed, morality (the inherited, tra-
ditional, instinctive mode of action in accordance
with moral sentiments) is surely also on the decline.
This, however, is not the case with the individual
virtues, moderation, justice, repose ; for the greatest
freedom of the conscious intellect leads at some
time, even unconsciously, back to these virtues, and
then enjoins their practice as expedient.

213.

The Fanatic of Distrust and his Surety.
— The Elder-. You wish to make the tremendous
venture and instruct mankind in the great things ?
What is your surety ?

Pyrrho : It is this : I intend to warn men
against myself; I intend to confess all the defects of
my character quite openly, and reveal to the world
my hasty conclusions, my contradictions, and my
foolish blunders. " Do not listen to me," I will say
to them, " until I have become equal to the meanest
among you, nay am even less than he. Struggle
against truth as long as you can, from your disgust
with her advocate. I shall be your seducer and
betrayer if you find in me the slightest glimmering
of respectability and dignity."

The Elder : You promise too much ; you cannot
bear this burden.

Pyrrho : Then I will tell men even that, and say
that I am too weak, and cannot keep my promise.
The greater my unworthiness, the more will they



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 301

mistrust the truth, when it passes through my
lips.

The Elder: You propose to teach distrust of
truth ?

Pyrrho : Yes ; distrust as it never was yet on
earth, distrust of anything and everything. This
is the only road to truth. The right eye must not
trust the left eye, and for some time light must be
called darkness : this is the path that you must
tread. Do not imagine that it will lead you to
fruit trees and fair pastures. You will find on this
road little hard grains — these are truths. For
years and years you will have to swallow handfuls
of lies, so as not to die of hunger, although you
know that they are lies. But those grains will be
sown and planted, and perhaps, perhaps some day
will come the harvest. No one may promise that
day, unless he be a fanatic.

The Elder : Friend, friend ! Your words too are
those of a fanatic !

Pyrrho : You are right ! I will be distrustful of
all words.

The Elder : Then you will have to be silent.

Pyrrho : I shall tell men that I have to be sjlent,
and that they are to mistrust my silence.

The Elder : So you draw back from your under-
taking ?

Pyrrho : On the contrary — you have shown me
the door through which I must pass.

The Elder : I don't know whether we yet com-
pletely understand each other ?

Pyrrho : Probably not.

The Elder : If only you understand yourself!



302 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

(Pyrrho turns round and laughs.)
The Elder : Ah, friend ! Silence and laughter —
is that now your whole philosophy ?
Pyrrho : There might be a worse.

214.
EUROPEAN BOOKS.— In reading Montaigne, La
Rochefoucauld, La Bruyere, Fontenelle (especially
the Dialogues des Morts), Vauvenargues, and Cham-
fort we are nearer to antiquity than in any group
of six authors of other nations. Through these
six the spirit of the last centuries before Christ
has once more come into being, and they collec-
tively form an important link in the great and
still continuous chain of the Renaissance. Their
books are raised above all changes of national
taste and philosophical nuances from which as a
rule every book takes and must take its hue in
order to become famous. They contain more real
ideas than all the books of German philosophers

put together : ideas of the sort that breed ideas

I am at a loss how to define to the end : enough to
say that they appear to me writers who wrote
neither for children nor for visionaries, neither for
virgins nor for Christians, neither for Germans nor

for I am again at a loss how to finish my list.

To praise them in plain terms, I may say that
had they been written in Greek, they would have
been understood by Greeks. How much, on the
other hand, would even a Plato have understood
of the writings of our best German thinkers — Goethe
and Schopenhauer, for instance — to say nothing
of the repugnance that he would have felt to



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 303

their style, particularly to its obscure, exaggerated,
and occasionally dry-as-dust elements ? And these
are defects from which these two among German
thinkers suffer least and yet far too much (Goethe
as thinker was fonder than he should have been
of embracing the cloud, and Schopenhauer almost
constantly wanders, not with impunity, among
symbols of objects rather than among the objects
themselves). — On the other hand, what clearness
and graceful precision there is in these Frenchmen !
The Greeks, whose ears were most refined, could
not but have approved of this art, and one quality
they would even have admired and reverenced —
the French verbal wit : they were extremely fond
of this quality, without being particularly strong
in it themselves.

215.

Fashion and Modernity. — Wherever ignor-
ance, uncleanness, and superstition are still rife,
where communication is backward, agriculture poor,
and the priesthood powerful, national costumes are
still worn. Fashion, on the other hand, rules where
the opposite conditions prevail. Fashion is accor-
dingly to be found next to the virtues in modern
Europe. Are we to call it their seamy side? —
Masculine dress that is fashionable and no longer
national proclaims of its wearer : firstly, that he
does not wish to appear as an individual or as
member of a class or race ; that he has made an
intentional suppression of these kinds of vanity a
law unto himself: secondly, that he is a worker,
and has little time for dressing and self-adornment,



304 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

and moreover regards anything expensive or lux-
urious in material and cut as out of harmony with
his work : lastly, that by his clothes he indic-
ates the more learned and intellectual callings as
those to which he stands or would like to stand
nearest as a European — whereas such national
costumes as still exist would exhibit the occupa-
tions of brigand, shepherd, and soldier as the most
desirable and distinguished. Within this general
character of masculine fashion exist the slight
fluctuations demanded by the vanity of young
men, the dandies and dawdlers of our great
cities — in other words, Europeans who have
not yet reached maturity. — European women are
as yet far less mature, and for this reason the
fluctuations with them are much greater. They
also will not have the national costume, and hate
to be recognised by their dress as German, French,
or Russian. They are, however, very desirous of
creating an impression as individuals. Then, too,
their dress must leave no one in doubt that they
belong to one of the more reputable classes of
society (to " good " or " high " or " great " society),
and on this score their pretensions are all the
greater if they belong scarcely or not at all to that
class. Above all, the young woman does not want
to wear what an older woman wears, because she
thinks she loses her market value if she is suspected
of being somewhat advanced in years. The older
woman, on the other hand, would like to deceive
the world as long as possible by a youthful garb.
From this competition must continually arise
temporary fashions, in which the youthful element



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 305

is unmistakably and inimitably apparent. But after
the inventive genius of the young female artists
has run riot for some time in such indiscreet reve-
lations of youth (or rather, after the inventive
genius of older, courtly civilisations and of still
existing peoples — in fact, of the whole world of
dress — has been pressed into the service, and, say,
the Spaniards, Turks, and ancient Greeks have been
yoked together for the glorification of fair flesh),
then they at last discover, time and again, that
they have not been good judges of their own in-
terest ; that if they wish to have power over men,
the game of hide-and-seek with the beautiful body
is more likely to win than naked or half-naked
honesty. And then the wheel of taste and vanity
turns once more in an opposite direction. The
rather older young women find that their kingdom
has come, and the competition of the dear, absurd
creatures rages again from the beginning. — But the
more women advance mentally, and no longer
among themselves concede the pre-eminence to an
unripe age, the smaller their fluctuations of costume
grow and the less elaborate their adornment. A
just verdict in this respect must not be based on
ancient models — in other words, not on the standard
of the dress of women who dwell on the shores of
the Mediterranean — but must have an eye to the
climatic conditions of the central and northern
regions, where the intellectual and creative spirit
of Europe now finds its most natural home. —
Generally speaking, therefore, it is not change that
will be the characteristic mark of fashion and
modernity, for change is retrograde, and betokens
vol. 11. U



306 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



the still unripened men and women of Europe ;
rather the repudiation of national, social, and in-
dividual vanity. Accordingly, it is commendable,
because involving a saving of time and strength,
if certain cities and districts of Europe think and
invent for all the rest in the matter of dress, in
view of the fact that a sense of form does not
seem to have been bestowed upon all. Nor is
it really an excessive ambition, so long as these
fluctuations still exist, for Paris, for example, to
claim to be the sole inventor and innovator in this
sphere. If a German, from hatred of these claims
on the part of a French city, wishes to dress differ-
ently, — as, for example, in the Diirer style, — let
him reflect that he then has a costume which
the Germans of olden times wore, but which the
Germans have not in the slightest degree invented.
For there has never been a style of dress that
characterised the German as a German. Moreover,
let him observe how he looks in his costume, and
whether his altogether modern face, with all its hues
and wrinkles, does not raise a protest against a
Diirer fashion of dress. — Here, where the concepts
" modern " and " European " are almost identical, we
understand by " Europe " a far wider region than
is embraced by the Europe of geography, the little
peninsula of Asia. In particular, we must include
America, in so far as America is the daughter of
our civilisation. On the other hand, not all Europe
falls under the heading of cultured " Europe," but
only those nations and divisions of nations which
have their common past in Greece, Rome, Judaism,
and Christianity.



; but



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 307
2l6.

" German Virtue." — There is no denying that
from the end of the eighteenth century a current
of moral awakening flowed through Europe. Then
only Virtue found again the power of speech. She
learnt to discover the unrestrained gestures of ex-
altation and emotion, she was no longer ashamed of
herself, and she created philosophies and poems for
her own glorification. If we look for the sources of
this current, we come upon Rousseau, but the mythical
Rousseau, the phantom formed from the impression
left by his writings (one might almost say again, his
mythically interpreted writings) and by the indica-
tions that he provided himself. He and his public
constantly worked at the fashioning of this ideal
figure. The other origin lies in the resurrection of
the Stoical side of Rome's greatness, whereby the
French so nobly carried on the task of the Renais-
sance. With striking success they proceeded from
the reproduction of antique forms tothe reproduction
of antique characters. Thus they may always claim
a title to the highest honours, as the nation which has
hitherto given the modern world its best books and
its best men. How this twofold archetype, the
mythical Rousseau and the resurrected spirit of
Rome, affected France's weaker neighbours, is par-
ticularly noticeable in Germany, which, in conse-
quence of her novel and quite unwonted impulse
to seriousness and loftiness in will and self-control,
finally came to feel astonishment at her own new-
found virtue, and launched into the world the con-
cept " German virtue," as if this were the most



308 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

original and hereditary of her possessions. The first
great men who transfused into their own blood that
French impulse towards greatness and consciousness
of the moral will were more honest, and more grate-
ful. Whence comes the moralism of Kant ? He is
continually reminding us : from Rousseau and the
revival of Stoic Rome. The moralism of Schiller
has the same source and the same glorification of
the source. The moralism of Beethoven in notes is
a continual song in praise of Rousseau, the antique
French, and Schiller. " Young Germany " was the
first to forget its gratitude, because in the meantime
people had listened to the preachers of hatred of
the French. The "young German " came to the fore
with more consciousness than is generally allowed
to youths. When he investigated his paternity,
he might well think of the proximity of Schiller,
Schleiermacher, and Fichte. But he should have
looked for his grandfathers in Paris and Geneva,
and it was very short-sighted of him to believe what
he believed : that virtue was not more than thirty
years old. People became used to demanding that
the word " German " should connote " virtue," and
this process has not been wholly forgotten to
this day. — Be it observed further that this moral
awakening, as may almost be guessed, has resulted
only in drawbacks and obstacles to the recognition
of moral phenomena. What is the entire German
philosophy, starting from Kant, with all its French,
English, and Italian offshoots and by-products ? A
semi-theological attack upon Helvetius, a rejection
of the slowly and laboriously acquired views and
signposts of the right road, which in the end he







THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 309

collected and expressed so well. To this day Hel-
vetius is the best-abused of all good moralists and
good men in Germany.



217.

Classic and Romantic. — Both classically and
romantically minded spirits — two species that al-
ways exist — cherish a vision of the future ; but the
former derive their vision from the strength of their
time, the latter from its weakness.



218.

The Machine as Teacher. — Machinery teaches
in itself the dovetailed working of masses of men,
in activities where each has but one thing to do. It
is the model of party organisations and of warfare.
On the other hand, it does not teach individual self-
glorification, for it makes of the many a machine,
and of each individual a tool for one purpose. Its
most general effect is to teach the advantage of
centralisation.

219.

Unable to Settle. — One likes to live in a
small town. But from time to time just this small
town drives us out into bare and lonely Nature, es-
pecially when we think we know it too well. Finally,
in order to refresh ourselves from Nature, we go to
the big town. A few draughts from this cup and we
see its dregs, and the circle begins afresh, with the
small town as starting-point. — So the moderns live ;



3IO HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






they are in all things rather too thorough to be able
to settle like the men of other days.

220.

Reaction against the Civilisation of
Machinery. — The machine, itself a product of the
highest mental powers, sets in motion hardly any
but the lower, unthinking forces of the men who
serve it. True, it unfetters a vast quantity of force
which would otherwise lie dormant But it does not
communicate the impulse to climb higher, to im-
prove, to become artistic. It creates activity and
monotony, but this in the long-run produces a
counter-effect, a despairing ennui of the soul, which
through machinery has learnt to hanker after the
variety of leisure.

221.

The Danger of Enlightenment. — All the
half-insane, theatrical, bestially cruel, licentious, and
especially sentimental and self-intoxicating ele-
ments which go to form the true revolutionary sub-
stance, and became flesh and spirit, before the
revolution, in Rousseau — all this composite being,
with factitious enthusiasm, finally set even " enlighten-
ment " upon its fanatical head, which thereby began
itself to shine as in an illuminating halo. Yet, en-
lightenment is essentially foreign to that phenome-
non, and, if left to itself, would have pierced silently
through the clouds like a shaft of light, long content
to transfigure individuals alone, and thus only slowly
transfiguring national customs and institutions as
well. But now, bound hand and foot to a violent and



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 311

abrupt monster, enlightenment itself became violent
and abrupt. Its danger has therefore become almost
greater than its useful quality of liberation and il-
lumination, which it introduced into the great re-
volutionary movement. Whoever grasps this will
also know from what confusion it has to be extri-
cated, from what impurities to be cleansed, in order
that it may then by itself continue the work of
enlightenment and also nip the revolution in the bud
and nullify its effects.

222.
Passion in the Middle Ages.— The Middle
Ages are the period of great passions. Neither an-
tiquity nor our period possesses this widening of the
soul. Never was the capacity of the soul greater or
measured by larger standards. The physical, pri-
meval sensuality of the barbarian races and the over-
soulful, over-vigilant, over-brilliant eyes of Christian
mystics, the most childish and youthful and the
most over-ripe and world-weary, the savageness of
the beast of prey and the effeminacy and excessive
refinement of the late antique spirit — all these ele-
ments were then not seldom united in one and the
same person. Thus, if a man was seized by a
passion, the rapidity of the torrent must have been
greater, the whirl more confused, the fall deeper
than ever before. — We modern men may be content
to feel that we have suffered a loss here.

223.
Robbing and Saving.— All intellectual move-
ments whereby the great may hope to rob and the



312 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



small to save are sure to prosper. That is why
instance, the German Reformation made progress.

224.

Gladsome Souls. — When even a remote hint
of drink, drunkenness, and an evil-smelling kind of
jocularity was given, the souls of the old Germans
waxed gladsome. Otherwise they were depressed,
but here they found something they really under-
stood.

225.

Debauchery at Athens. — Even when the fish-
market of Athens acquired its thinkers and poets,
Greek debauchery had a more idyllic and refined
appearance than Roman or German debauchery
ever had. The voice of Juvenal would have sounded
there like a hollow trumpet, and would have been
answered by a good-natured and almost childish
outburst of laughter.

226.

Cleverness of the Greek. — As the desire for
victory and pre-eminence is an ineradicable trait of
human nature, older and more primitive than any
respect of or joy in equality, the Greek State sanc-
tioned gymnastic and artistic competitions among
equals. In other words, it marked out an arena
where this impulse to conquer would find a vent
without jeopardising the political order. With the
final decline of gymnastic and artistic contests the
Greek State fell into a condition of profound unrest
and dissolution.



f, for



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 313
227.

The "Eternal Epicurus." — Epicurus has
lived in all periods, and lives yet, unbeknown to
those who called and still call themselves Epicureans,
and without repute among philosophers. He has
himself even forgotten his own name — that was the
heaviest luggage that he ever cast off.

228.

The Style of Superiority. — "University
slang," the speech of the German students, has its
origin among the students who do not study. The
latter know how to acquire a preponderance over
their more serious fellows by exposing all the farcical
elements of culture, respectability, erudition, order,
and moderation, and by having words taken from
these realms always on their lips, like the better
and more learned students, but with malice in their
glance and an accompanying grimace. This lan-
guage of superiority — the only one that is original
in Germany — is nowadays unconsciously used by
statesmen and newspaper critics as well. It is a
continual process of ironical quotation, a restless,
cantankerous squinting of the eye right and left, a
language of inverted commas and grimaces.

229.

The Recluse. — We retire into seclusion, but not
from personal misgivings, as if the political and
social conditions of the day did not satisfy us;
rather because by our retirement we try to save and



314 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

collect forces which will some day be urgently
needed by culture, the more this present is this
present y and, as such, fulfils its task. We form a
capital and try to make it secure, but, as in times
of real danger, our method is to bury our hoard.

230.

Tyrants of the Intellect. — In our times,
any one who expressed a single moral trait so
thoroughly as the characters of Theophrastus and
Moliere do, would be considered ill, and be spoken
of as possessing " a fixed idea." The Athens of the
third century, if we could visit it, would appear
to us populated by fools. Nowadays the democ-
racy of ideas rules in every brain — there the multi-
tude collectively is lord. A single idea that tried
to be lord is now called, as above stated, " a fixed
idea." This is our method of murdering tyrants —
we hint at the madhouse.

231.

A Most Dangerous Emigration.— In^Russia
there is an emigration of the intelligence. People
cross the frontier in order to read and write good
books. Thus, however, they are working towards
turning their country, abandoned by the intellect,
into a gaping Asiatic maw, which would fain
swallow our little Europe.

232.

Political Fools. — The almost religious love of
the king was transferred by the Greeks, when the



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 315

monarchy was abolished, to the polls. An idea can
be loved more than a person, and does not thwart
the lover so often as a beloved human being (for
the more men know themselves to be loved, the
less considerate they usually become, until they are
no longer worthy of love, and a rift really arises).
Hence the reverence for State and polzs was greater
than the reverence for princes had ever been. The
Greeks are the political fools of ancient history — to-
day other nations boast that distinction.

233-
Against Neglect of the Eyes.— Might one
not find among the cultured classes of England,
who read the Titnes, a decline in their powers of
sight every ten years ?

234.
Great Works and Great Faith. — One man
had great works, but his comrade had great faith
in these works. They were inseparable, but ob-
viously the former was entirely dependent upon the
latter.

235.
The Sociable Man.—" I don't get on well with
myself," said some one in explanation of his fondness
for society. " Society has a stronger digestion than
I have, and can put up with me."

236.
Shutting the Mind's Eyes. — If we are prac-
tised and accustomed to reflect upon our actions,



316 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

we must nevertheless close the inner eye while per-
forming an action (be this even only writing letters
or eating or drinking). Even in conversation with
average people we must know how to obscure our
own mental vision in order to attain and grasp
average thinking. This shutting of the eyes is a
conscious act and can be achieved by the will.



237.

The Most Terrible Revenge. — If we wish to
take a thorough revenge upon an opponent, we
must wait until we have our hand quite full of truths
and equities,and can calmly use the whole lot against
him. Hence the exercise of revenge may be identi-
fied with the exercise of equity. It is the most
terrible kind of revenge, for there is no higher
court to which an appeal can be made. Thus did
Voltaire revenge himself on Piron, with five lines
that sum up Piron's whole life, work, and character :
every word is a truth. So too he revenged himself
upon Frederick the Great in a letter to him from
Ferney.

238.

Taxes of Luxury. — In shops we buy the most
necessary and urgent things, and have to pay very
dear, because we pay as well for what is also to be
had there cheap, but seldom finds a customer —
articles of luxury that minister to pleasure. Thus
luxury lays a constant tax upon the man of simple
life who does without luxuries.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 317
239.

Why Beggars still Live. — If all alms were
given only out of compassion, the whole tribe of
beggars would long since have died of starvation.

240.

Why Beggars still Live. — The greatest of
almsgivers is cowardice.

241.

How the Thinker Makes Use of a Conver-
sation. — Without being eavesdroppers, we can hear
a good deal if we are able to see well, and at the
same time to let ourselves occasionally get out of
our own sight. But people do not know how to
make use of a conversation. They pay far too much
attention to what they want to say and reply, where-
as the true listener is often contented to make a
provisional answer and to say something merely as
a payment on account of politeness, but on the other
hand, with his memory lurking in ambush, carries
away with him all that the other said, together with
his tones and gestures in speaking. — In ordinary
conversation every one thinks he is the leader, just
as if two ships, sailing side by side and giving each
other a slight push here and there, were each firmly
convinced that the other ship was following or even
being towed.

242.

The Art of Excusing Oneself.— If some one
excuses himself to us, he has to make out a very




318 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

good case, otherwise we readily come to feel our-
selves the culprits, and experience an unpleasant
emotion.

243-
Impossible Intercourse. — The ship of your
thoughts goes too deep for you to be able to travel
with it in the waters of these friendly, decorous,
obliging people. There are too many shallows and
sandbanks : you would have to tack and turn, and
would find yourself continually at your wits' end,
and they would soon also be in perplexity as to
your perplexity, the reason for which they cannot
divine.

244.

The Fox of Foxes.— A true fox not only calls
sour the grapes he cannot reach, but also those he
has reached and snatched from the grasp of others.

245.

In Intimate Intercourse.— However closely
men are connected, there are still all the four
quarters of the heavens in their common horizon,
and at times they become aware of this fact.

246.

The Silence of Disgust. — Behold ! some one
undergoes a thorough and painful transformation
as thinker and human being, and makes a public
avowal of the change. And those who hear him
see nothing, and still believe he is the same as
before ! This common experience has already dis-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 319

gusted many writers. They had rated the intel-
lectuality of mankind too highly, and made a vow
to be silent as soon as they became aware of their
mistake.

247.

Business Seriousness. — The business of many
rich and eminent men is their form of recreation
from too long periods of habitual leisure. They then
become as serious and impassioned as other people
do in their rare moments of leisure and amusement.

248.

The Eye's Double Sense.— Just as a sudden
scaly ripple runs over the waters at your feet, so
there are similar sudden uncertainties and ambigu-
ities in the human eye. They lead to the question :
is it a shudder, or a smile, or both?

249.

Positive and Negative. — This thinker needs
no one to refute him — he is quite capable of doing
that himself.

250.

The Revenge of the Empty Nets.— Above
all we should beware of those who have the bitter
feeling of the fisherman who after a hard day's work
comes home in the evening with nets empty.

251.

Non-Assertion ofour Rights. — The exertion
of power is laborious and demands courage. That



320



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



is why so many do not assert their most valid rights,
because their rights are a kind of power, and they
are too lazy or too cowardly to exercise them. In-
dulgence and patience are the names given to the
virtues that cloak these faults.



252.

Bearers of Light. — In Society there would be
no sunshine if the born flatterers (I mean the so-
called amiable people) did not bring some in with
them.

253.
When most Benevolent. — When a man has
been highly honoured and has eaten a little, he is
most benevolent.

254.

To THE Light. — Men press forward to the light
not in order to see better but to shine better. — The
person before whom we shine we gladly allow to
be called a light.

255.

The Hypochondriac. — The hypochondriac is a
man who has just enough intellect and pleasure in
the intellect to take his sorrows, his losses, and his
mistakes seriously. But the field on which he grazes
is too small : he crops it so close that in the end he
has to look for single stalks. Thus he finally be-
comes envious and avaricious — and only then is he
unbearable.

256.

Giving in Return. — Hesiod advises us to give
the neighbour who has helped us good measure and,



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 32 1

if possible, fuller measure in return, as soon as we
have the power. For this is where the neighbour's
pleasure comes in, since his former benevolence brings
him interest. Moreover, he who gives in return also
has his pleasure, inasmuch as, by giving a little
more than he got, he redeems the slight humilia-
tion of being compelled to seek aid.

257.

More Subtle than is Necessary. — Our sense
of observation for how far others perceive our weak-
nesses is far more subtle than our sense of obser-
vation for the weaknesses of others. It follows that
the first-named sense is more subtle than is neces-
sary.

258.

A Kind of Bright Shadows. — Close to the
nocturnal type of man we almost regularly find, as
if bound up with him, a bright soul. This is, as it
were, the negative shadow cast by the former.

259.
Not to take Revenge. — There are so many
subtle sorts of revenge that one who has occasion
to take revenge can really do or omit to do what he
likes. In any case, the whole world will agree, after
a time, that he has avenged himself. Hence the
avoidance of revenge is hardly within man's power.
He must not even so much as say that he does not
want to do so, since the contempt for revenge is
interpreted and felt as a sublime and exquisite form
of revenge. — It follows that we must do nothing
superfluous.

VOL. II. X



322



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



260.



The Mistake of Those who Pay Homage.—
Every one thinks he is paying a most agreeable com-
pliment to a thinker when he says that he himself
hit upon exactly the same idea and even upon the
same expression. The thinker, however, is seldom
delighted at hearing such news, nay, rather, he often
becomes distrustful of his own thoughts and ex-
pressions. He silently resolves to revise both some
day. If we wish to pay homage to any one, we
must beware of expressing our agreement, for this
puts us on the same level. — Often it is a matter of
social tact to listen to an opinion as if it were not
ours or even travelled beyond the limits of our own
horizon — as, for example, when an old man once in
a while opens the storehouse of his acquired know-
ledge.

261.

Letters. — A letter is an unannounced visit, and
the postman is the intermediary of impolite surprises.
Every week we ought to have one hour for receiving
letters, and then go and take a bath.



262.



Prejudiced. — Some one said : I have been pre-
judiced against myself from childhood upwards, and
hence I find some truth in every censure and some
absurdity in every eulogy. Praise I generally value
too low and blame too high.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 323
263.

The Path to Equality. — A few hours of
mountain-climbing make a blackguard and a saint
two rather similar creatures. Weariness is the
shortest'path to equality and fraternity — and finally
liberty is bestowed by sleep.

264.

Calumny. — If we begin to trace to its source a
real scandalous misrepresentation, we shall rarely
look for its origin in our honourable and straight-
forward enemies ; for if they invented anything of
the sort about us, they, as being our enemies, would
gain no credence. Those, however, to whom for
a time we have been most useful, but who, from
some reason or other, may be secretly sure that they
will obtain no more from us — such persons are in a
position to start the ball of slander rolling. They
gain credence, firstly, because it is assumed that they
would invent nothing likely to do them damage ;
secondly, because they have learnt to know us
intimately. — As a consolation, the much-slandered
man may say to himself: Calumnies are diseases of
others that break out in your body. They prove
that Society is a (moral) organism, so that you can
prescribe to yourself the cure that will in the end be
useful to others.

265.

The Child's Kingdom of Heaven. — The
happiness of a child is as much of a myth as the
happiness of the Hyperboreans of whom the Greeks



324 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



fabled. The Greeks supposed that, if indeed happi
ness dwells anywhere on our earth, it must certainly
dwell as far as possible from us, perhaps over yonder
at the edge of the world. Old people have the same
thought — if man is at all capable of being happy,
he must be happy as far as possible from our age,
at the frontiers and beginnings of life. For many
a man the sight of children, through the veil of this
myth, is the greatest happiness that he can feel. He
enters himself into the forecourt of heaven when
he says, "Suffer the little children to come unto
me, for of them is the kingdom of heaven." The
myth of the child's kingdom of heaven holds good,
in some way or other, wherever in the modern
world some sentimentality exists.



266.

The Impatient. — It is just the growing man
who does not want things in the growing stage.
He is too impatient for that. The youth will not
wait until, after long study, suffering, and privation,
his picture of men and things is complete. Ac-
cordingly, he confidently accepts another picture
that lies ready to his hand and is recommended to
him, and pins his faith to that, as if it must give
him at once the lines and colours of his own paint-
ing. He presses a philosopher or a poet to his
bosom, and must from that time forth perform long
stretches of forced labour and renounce his own
self. He learns much in the process, but he often
forgets what is most worth learning and know-
ing — his self. He remains all his life a partisan.



LODl-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 325

Ah, a vast amount of tedious work has to be done
before you find your own colours, your own brush,
your own canvas ! — Even then you are very far
from being a master in the art of life, but at least
you are the boss in your own workshop.

267.

There are no Teachers. — As thinkers we
ought only to speak of self-teaching. The instruc-
tion of the young by others is either an experiment
performed upon something as yet unknown and
unknowable, or else a thorough levelling process,
in order to make the new member of society con-
form to the customs and manners that prevail for
the time being. In both cases the result is accord-
ingly unworthy of a thinker — the handiwork of
parents and teachers, whom some valiantly honest
person* has called u nos ennemis naturels." One
day, when, as the world thinks, we have long since
finished our education, we discover ourselves. Then
begins the task of the thinker, and then is the time
to summon him to our aid — not as a teacher, but
as a self-taught man who has experience.

268.

Sympathy with Youth. — We are sorry when
we hear that some one who is still young is losing
his teeth or growing blind. If we knew all the irre-
vocable and hopeless feelings hidden in his whole
being, how great our sorrow would be ! Why do

* Stendhal.— Tr.



326 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

we really suffer on this account ? Because youth
has to continue the work we have undertaken, and
every flaw and failing in its strength is likely to
injure our work, that will fall into its hands. It is
the sorrow at the imperfect guarantee of our im-
mortality : or, if we only feel ourselves as executors
of the human mission, it is the sorrow that this
mission must pass to weaker hands than ours.

269.

The Ages OF Life. — The comparison of the
four ages of life with the four seasons of the year
is a venerable piece of folly. Neither the first
twenty nor the last twenty years of a life correspond
to a season of the year, assuming that we are not
satisfied with drawing a parallel between white hair
and snow and similar colour-analogies. The first
twenty years are a preparation for life in general,
for the whole year of life, a sort of long New Year's
Day. The last twenty review, assimilate, bring into
union and harmony all that has been experienced
till then : as, in a small degree, we do on every
New Year's Eve with the whole past year. But in
between there really lies an interval which suggests
a comparison with the seasons — the time from the
twentieth to the fiftieth year (to speak here of de-
cades in the lump, while it is an understood thing
that every one must refine for himself these rough
outlines). Those three decades correspond to three
seasons — summer, spring, and autumn. Winter
human life has none, unless we like to call the (un-
fortunately) often intervening hard, cold, lonely,



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 327

hopeless, unfruitful periods of disease the winters
of man. The twenties, hot, oppressive, stormy,
impetuous, exhausting years, when we praise the
day in the evening, when it is over, as we wipe the
sweat from our foreheads — years in which work
seems to us cruel but necessary — these twenties are
the summer of life. The thirties, on the other hand,
are its spring-time, with the air now too warm, now
too cold, ever restless and stimulating, bubbling sap,
bloom of leaves, fragrance of buds everywhere, many
delightful mornings and evenings, work to which the
song of birds awakens us, .a true work of the heart,
a kind of joy in our own robustness, strengthened
by the savour of hopeful anticipation. Lastly the
forties, mysterious like all that is stationary, like a
high, broad plateau, traversed by a fresh breeze, with
a clear, cloudless sky above it, which always has the
same gentle look all day and half the night — the
time of harvest and cordial gaiety— that is the
autumn of life.

270.

Women's Intellect in Modern Society. —
What women nowadays think of men's intellect
may be divined from the fact that in their art of
adornment they think of anything but of empha-
sising the intellectual side of their faces or their
single intellectual features. On the contrary, they
conceal such traits, and understand, for example
by an arrangement of their hair over their fore-
head, how to give themselves an appearance of vivid,
eager sensuality and materialism, just when they
but slightly possess those qualities. Their convic-



328 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



,.



tion that intellect in women frightens men goes so
far that they even gladly deny the keenness of the
most intellectual sense and purposely invite the
reputation of short-sightedness. They think they
will thereby make men more confiding. It is as if a
soft, attractive twilight were spreading itself around
them.

271.

Great and Transitory. — What moves the ob-
server to tears is the rapturous look of happiness
with which a fair young bride gazes upon her
husband. We feel all the melancholy of autumn
in thinking of the greatness and of the transitori-
ness of human happiness.

272.
Sense and Sacrifice. — Many a woman has the
intelletto del sacrifizio* and no longer enjoys life
when her husband refuses to sacrifice her. With
all her wit, she then no longer knows — whither?
and without perceiving it, is changed from sacri-
ficial victim to sacrificial priest.

273-
The Unfeminine.-— " Stupid as a man," say the
women ; " Cowardly as a woman," say the men.
Stupidity in a woman is unfeminine.

274.
Masculine and Feminine Temperament and
Mortality. — That the male sex has a worse

*A transposition of sacrifizio delP intelletto, the Jesuit
maxim. — Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 329

temperament than the female follows from the fact
that male children have a greater mortality than
female, clearly because they "leap out of their
skins" more easily. Their wildness and unbear-
ableness soon make all the bad stuff in them deadly.



275.

The Age of Cyclopean Building. — The de-
mocratisation of Europe is a resistless force. Even
he who would stem the tide uses those very means
that democratic thought first put into men's hands,
and he makes these means more handy and work-
able. The most inveterate enemies of democracy
(I mean the spirits of upheaval) seem only to exist
in order, by the fear that they inspire, to drive for-
ward the different parties faster and faster on the
democratic course. Now we may well feel sorry
for those who are working consciously and honour-
ably for this future. There is something dreary and
monotonous in their faces, and the grey dust seems
to have been wafted into their very brains. Never-
theless, posterity may possibly some day laugh at
our anxiety,and seein the democraticwork of several
generations what we see in the building of stone
dams and walls — an activity that necessarily covers
clothes and face with a great deal of dust, and
perhaps unavoidably makes the workmen, too, a
little dull-witted ; but who would on that account
desire such work undone ? It seems that the de-
mocratisation of Europe is a link in the chain of
those mighty prophylactic principles which are the
thought of the modern era, and whereby we rise up



330 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

in revolt against the Middle Ages. Now, and now
only, is the age of Cyclopean building ! A final
security in the foundations, that the future may
build on them without danger ! Henceforth, an
impossibility of the orchards of culture being once
more destroyed overnight by wild, senseless moun-
tain torrents ! Dams and walls against barbarians,
against plagues, against physical and spiritual serf-
dom ! And all this understood at first roughly and
literally, but gradually in an ever higher and more
spiritual sense, so that all the principles here indi-
cated may appear as the intellectual preparation of
the highest artist in horticulture, who can only apply
himself to his own task when the other is fully ac-
complished! — True, if we consider the long intervals
of time that here lie between means and end, the
great, supreme labour, straining the powers and
brains of centuries, that is necessary in order to
create or to provide each individual means, we must
not bear too hardly upon the workers of the present
when they loudly proclaim that the wall and the
fence are already the end and the final goal. After
all, no one yet sees the gardener and the fruit, for
whose sake the fence exists.



276.

The Right of Universal Suffrage. — The
people has not granted itself universal suffrage but,
wherever this is now in force, it has received and
accepted it as a temporary measure. But in any
case the people has the right to restore the gift, if
it does not satisfy its anticipations. This dissatis-



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 33 1

faction seems universal nowadays, for when, at any
occasion where the vote is exercised, scarce two-
thirds, nay perhaps not even the majority of all
voters, go to the polls, that very fact is a vote against
the whole suffrage system. — On this point, in fact,
we must pronounce a much sterner verdict. A law
that enacts that the majority shall decide as to the
welfare of all cannot be built up on the foundation
that it alone has provided, for it is bound to require
a far broader foundation, namely the unanimity of
all. Universal suffrage must not only be the expres-
sion of the will of a majority, but of the whole country.
Thus the dissent of a very small minority is already
enough to set aside the system as impracticable ;
and the abstention from voting is in fact a dissent
of this kind, which ruins the whole institution. The
" absolute veto " of the individual, or — not to be too
minute — the veto of a few thousands, hangs over the
system as the consequence of justice. On every oc-
casion when it is employed, the system must, accord-
ing to the variety of the division, first prove that it
has still a right to exist.



277.

False Conclusions.— What false conclusions
are drawn in spheres where we are not at home,
even by those of us who are accustomed as men of
science to draw right conclusions ! It is humiliat-
ing ! Now it is clear that in the great turmoil of
worldly doings, in political affairs, in all sudden and
urgent matters such as almost every day brings up,
these false conclusions must decide. For no one



332 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

feels at home with novelties that have sprung up in
the night. All political work, even with great states-
men, is an improvisation that trusts to luck.

278.

Premisses of the Age of Machinery.— The
press, the machine, the railway, the telegraph are
premisses of which no one has yet dared to draw
the conclusions that will follow in a thousand years.

279.

A Drag upon Culture. — When we are told that
here men have no time for productive occupations,
because military manoeuvres and processions take
up their days, and the rest of the population must
feed and clothe them, their dress, however, being
striking, often gay and full of absurdities ; that there
only a few distinguished qualities are recognised,
individuals resemble each other more than elsewhere,
or at any rate are treated as equals, yet obedience
is exacted and yielded without reasoning, for men
command and make no attempt to convince ; that
here punishments are few, but these few cruel and
likely to become the final and most terrible ; that
there treason ranks as the capital offence, and even
the criticism of evils is only ventured on by the most
audacious ; that there, again, human life is cheap,
and ambition often takes the form of setting life in
danger — when we hear all this, we at once say, "This
is a picture of a barbarous society that rests on a
hazardous footing." One man perhaps will add, " It
is a portrait of Sparta." But another will become



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 333

meditative and declare that this is a description of
our modern military system, as it exists in the midst
of our altogether different culture and society, a
living anachronism, the picture, as above said, of a
community resting on a hazardous footing ; a post-
humous work of the past, which can only act as a
drag upon the wheels of the present. — Yet at times
even a drag upon culture is vitally necessary — that
is to say, when culture is advancing too rapidly
downhill or (as perhaps in this case) uphill.

280.

More Reverence for Them that Know. —
In the competition of production and sale the public
is made judge of the product. But the public has
no special knowledge, and judges by the appearance
of the wares. In consequence, the art of appearance
(and perhaps the taste for it) must increase under the
dominance of competition, while on the other hand
the quality of every product must deteriorate. The
result will be — so far as reason does not fall in value
— that one day an end will be put to that competi-
tion, and a new principle will win the day. Only
the master of the craft should pronounce a verdict
on the work, and the public should be dependent on
the belief in the personality of the judge and his
honesty. Accordingly, no anonymous work ! At
least an expert should be there as guarantor and
pledge his name if the name of the creator is lack-
ing or is unknown. The cheapness of an article
is for the layman another kind of illusion and de-
ceit, since only durability can decide that a thing



334 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

is cheap and to what an extent. But it is difficult,
and for a layman impossible, to judge of its dura-
bility. — Hence that which produces an effect on the
eye and costs little at present gains the advantage
— this being naturally machine-made work. Again,
machinery — that is to say, the cause of the greatest
rapidity and facility in production — favours the most
saleable kind of article. Otherwise it involves no
tangible profit; it would be too little used and
too often stand idle. But as to what is most sale-
able, the public, as above said, decides : it must be
the most exchangeable — in other words, the thing
that appears good and also appears cheap. Thus
in the domain of labour our motto must also hold
good : " More respect for them that know ! "



281.

The Danger of Kings.— Democracy has it in
its power, without any violent means, and only by
a lawful pressure steadily exerted, to make kingship
and emperorship hollow, until only a zero remains,
perhaps with the significance of every zero in that,
while nothing in itself, it multiplies a number ten-
fold if placed on the right side. Kingship and em-
perorship would remain a gorgeous ornament upon
the simple and appropriate dress of democracy, a
beautiful superfluity that democracy allows itself,
a relic of all the historically venerable, primitive or-
naments, nay the symbol of history itself, and in
this unique position a highly effective thing if, as
above said, it does not stand alone, but is put on the
right side. — In order to avoid the danger of this



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 335

nullification, kings hold by their teeth to their dig-
nity as war-lords. To this end they need wars, or
in other words exceptional circumstances, in which
that slow, lawful pressure of the democratic forces
is relaxed.

282.

The Teacher a Necessary Evil. — Let us
have as few people as possible between the pro-
ductive minds and the hungry and recipient minds !
The middlemen almost unconsciously adulterate the
food which they supply. For their work as middle-
men they want too high a fee for themselves, and
this is drawn from the original, productive spirits
— namely, interest, admiration, leisure, money, and
other advantages. — Accordingly, we should always
look upon the teacher as a necessary evil, just like
the merchant ; as an evil that we should make as
small as possible. — Perhaps the prevailing distress
in Germany has its main cause in the fact that too
many wish to live and live well by trade (in other
words, desiring as far as possible to diminish prices
for the producer and raise prices for the consumer,
and thus to profit by the greatest possible loss to
both). In the same way, we may certainly trace a
main cause of the prevailing intellectual poverty in
the superabundance of teachers. It is because of
teachers that so little is learnt, and that so badly.

283.

The Tax of Homage.— Him whom we know
and honour, — be he physician, artist, or artisan, —
who does and produces something for us, we gladly



336 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

pay as highly as we can, often a fee beyond our
means. On the other hand, we pay the unknown
as low a price as possible ; here is a contest in which
every one struggles and makes others struggle for a
foot's breadth of land. In the work of the known
there is something that cannot be bought, the senti-
ment and ingenuity put into his work for our own
sake. We think we cannot better express our sense
of obligation than by a sort of sacrifice on our part.
— The heaviest tax is the tax of homage. The more
competition prevails, the more we buy for the un-
known and work for the unknown, the lower does this
tax become, whereas it is really the standard for the
loftiness of man's spiritual intercourse.

284.

The Means towards Genuine Peace. — No
government will nowadays admit that it maintains
an army in order to satisfy occasionally its passion
for conquest. The army is said to serve only
defensive purposes. This morality, which justifies
self-defence, is called in as the government's advo-
cate. This means, however, reserving morality for
ourselves and immorality for our neighbour, because
he must be thought eager for attack and conquest
if our state is forced to consider means of self-
defence. — At the same time, by our explanation of
our need of an army (because he denies the lust of
attack just as our state does, and ostensibly also
maintains his army for defensive reasons), we pro-
claim him a hypocrite and cunning criminal, who
would fain seize by surprise, without any fighting,



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 337

a harmless and unwary victim. In this attitude all
states face each other to-day. They presuppose
evil intentions on their neighbour's part and good
intentions on their own. This hypothesis, however,
is an inhuman notion, as bad as and worse than
war. Nay, at bottom it is a challenge and motive
to war, foisting as it does upon the neighbouring
state the charge of immorality, and thus provoking
hostile intentions and acts. The doctrine of the
army as a means of self-defence must be abjured
as completely as the lust of conquest. Perhaps a
memorable day will come when a nation renowned
in wars and victories, distinguished by the highest
development of military order and intelligence, and
accustomed to make the heaviest sacrifice to these
objects, will voluntarily exclaim, "We will break
our swords," and will destroy its whole military
system, lock, stock, and barrel. Making ourselves
defenceless (after having been the most strongly
defended) from a loftiness of sentiment — that is the
means towards genuine peace, which must always
rest upon a pacific disposition. The so-called armed
peace that prevails at present in all v countries is a
sign of a bellicose disposition, of a disposition that
trusts neither itself nor its neighbour, and, partly
from hate, partly from fear, refuses to lay down its
weapons. Better to perish than to hate and fear,
and twice as far better to perish than to make one-
self hated and feared — this must some day become
the supreme maxim of every political community ! —
Our liberal representatives of the people, as is well
known, have not the time for reflection on the nature
of humanity, or else they would know that they are



338 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






working in vain when they work for "a gradual
diminution of the military burdens." Onthe contrary,
when the distress of these burdens is greatest, the
sort of God who alone can help here will be nearest.
The tree of military glory can only be destroyed at
one swoop, with one stroke of lightning. But, as
you know, lightning comes from the cloud and from
above.

285.

Whether Property can be squared with
JUSTICE. — When the injustice of property is strongly
felt (and the hand of the great clock is once more at
this place), we formulate two methods of relieving
this injustice: either an equal distribution, or an
abolition of private possession and a return to State
ownership. The latter method is especially dear to
the hearts of our Socialists, who are angry with that
primitive Jew for saying, "Thou shalt not steal."
In their view the eighth* commandment should
rather run, " Thou shalt not possess." — The former
method was frequently tried in antiquity, always
indeed on a small scale, and yet with poor success.
From this failure we too may learn. " Equal plots
of land" is easily enough said, but how much
bitterness is aroused by the necessary division and
separation, by the loss of time-honoured possessions,
how much piety is wounded and sacrificed ! We
uproot the foundation of morality when we uproot
boundary-stones. Again, how much fresh bitter-
ness among the new owners, how much envy and
looking askance ! For there have never been two
* The original, by a curious slip, has " seventh." — Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 339

really equal plots of land, and if there were, man's
envy of his neighbour would prevent him from
believing in their equality. And how long would
this equality, unhealthy and poisoned at the very
roots, endure? In a few generations, by inherit-
ance, here one plot would come to five owners, there
five plots to one. Even supposing that men ac-
quiesced in such abuses through the enactment of
stern laws of inheritance, the same equal plots
would indeed exist, but there would also be needy
malcontents, owning nothing but dislike of their
kinsmen and neighbours, and longing for a general
upheaval. — If, however, by the second method we
try to restore ownership to the community and make
the individual but a temporary tenant, we interfere
with agriculture. For man is opposed to all that is
only a transitory possession, unblessed with his own
care and sacrifice. With such property he behaves
in freebooter fashion, as robber or as worthless
spendthrift. When Plato declares that self-seeking
would be removed with the abolition of property,
we may answer him that, if self-seeking be taken
away, man will no longer possess the four cardinal
virtues either ; as we must say that the most deadly
plague could not injure mankind so terribly as if
vanity were one day to disappear. Without vanity
and self-seeking what are human virtues ? By this
I am far from meaning that these virtues are but
varied names and masks for these two qualities.
Plato's Utopian refrain, which is still sung by
Socialists, rests upon a deficient knowledge of men.
He lacked the historical science of moral emotions,
the insight into the origin of the good and useful



340 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






characteristics of the human soul. He believed, like
all antiquity, in good and evil as in black and white
— that is to say, in a radical difference between good
and bad men and good and bad qualities. — In order
that property may henceforth inspire more con-
fidence and become more moral, we should keep
open all the paths of work for small fortunes, but
should prevent the effortless and sudden acquisition of
wealth. Accordingly, we should take all the branches
of transport and trade which favour the accumu-
lation of large fortunes — especially, therefore, the
money market — out of the hands of private persons
or private companies, and look upon those who own
too much, just as upon those who own nothing, as
types fraught with danger to the community.

286.

THE VALUE OF LABOUR.— If we try to determine
the value of labour by the amount of time, industry,
good or bad will, constraint, inventiveness or lazi-
ness, honesty or make-believe bestowed upon it, the
valuation can never be a just one. For the whole
personality would have to be thrown into the scale,
and this is impossible. Here the motto is, " Judge
not ! " But after all the cry for justice is the cry we
now hear from those who are dissatisfied with the
present valuation of labour. If we reflect further we
find every person non- responsible for his product, the
labour; hence merit can never be derived therefrom,
and every labour is as good or as bad as it must be
through this or that necessary concatenation of forces
and weaknesses, abilities and desires. The worker



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 341

is not at liberty to say whether he shall work or not,
or to decide how he shall work. Only the stand-
points of usefulness, wider and narrower, have created
the valuation of labour. What we at present call
justice does very well in this sphere as a highly
refined utility, which does not only consider the
moment and exploit the immediate opportunity, but
looks to the permanence of all conditions, and thus
also keeps in view the well-being of the worker, his
physical and spiritual contentment : in order that he
and his posterity may work well for our posterity
and become trustworthy for longer periods than the
individual span of human life. The exploitation of
the worker was, as we now understand, a piece of
folly, a robbery at the expense of the future, a jeo-
pardisation of society. We almost have the war now,
and in any case the expense of maintaining peace,
of concluding treaties and winning confidence, will
henceforth be very great, because the folly of the
exploiters was very great and long-lasting.

2S7.

Of the Study of the Social Body. — The
worst drawback for the modern student of economics
and political science in Europe, and especially in
Germany, is that the actual conditions, instead of
exemplifying rules, illustrate exceptions or stages of
transition and extinction. We must therefore learn
to look beyond actually existing conditions and, for
example, turn our eyes to distant North America,
where we can still contemplate and investigate, if we
will, the initial and normal movement of the social



342



HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






body. In Germany such a study requires arduous
and historical research, or, as I have suggested, a
telescope.

288.

How far Machinery Humiliates. — Machin-
ery is impersonal ; it robs the piece of work of its
pride, of the individual merits and defects that cling
to all work that is not machine-made — in other words,
of its bit of humanity. Formerly, all buying from
handicraftsmen meant a mark of distinction for their
personalities, with whose productions people sur-
rounded themselves. Furniture and dress accord-
ingly became the symbols of mutual valuation and
personal connection. Nowadays, on the other hand,
we seem to live in the midst of anonymous and im-
personal serfdom. — We must not buy the facilita-
tion of labour too dear.



289.

Century-old Quarantine. — Democratic in-
stitutions are centres of quarantine against the old
plague of tyrannical desires. As such they are ex-
tremely useful and extremely tedious.



290.

The Most Dangerous Partisan. — The most
dangerous partisan is he whose defection would in-
volve the ruin of the whole party — in other words,
the best partisan.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 343
291.

Destiny and the Stomach. — A piece more or
less of bread and butter in the jockey's body is oc-
casionally the decisive factor in races and bets, and
thus in the good and bad luck of thousands. — So
long as the destiny of nations depends upon diplo-
mats, the stomachs of diplomats will always be the
object of patriotic misgivings. Quousque tandem . .



292.

The Victory of Democracy. — All political
powers nowadays attempt to exploit the fear of
Socialism for their own strengthening. Yet in the
long run democracy alone gains the advantage, for
#// parties are now compelled to flatter " the masses *
and grant them facilities and liberties of all kinds,
with the result that the masses finally become omni-
potent. The masses are as far as possible removed
from Socialism as a doctrine of altering the acquisi-
tion of property. I f once they get the steering-wheel
into their hands, through great majorities in their
Parliaments, they will attack with progressive taxa-
tion the whole dominant system of capitalists, mer-
chants, and financiers, and will in fact slowly create
a middle class which may forget Socialism like a
disease that has been overcome. — The practical re-
sult of this increasing democratisation will next be
a European league of nations, in which each indi-
vidual nation, delimited by the proper geographical
frontiers, has the position of a canton with its separ-
ate rights. Small account will be taken of the



344 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



historic memories of previously existing nations
because the pious affection for these memories will
be gradually uprooted under the democratic regime,
with all its craze for novelty and experiment The
corrections of frontiers that will prove necessary will
be so carried out as to serve the interests of the great
cantons and at the same time that of the whole federa-
tion, but not that of any venerable memories. To
find the standpoints for these corrections will be the
task of future diplomats, who will have to be at the
same time students of civilisation, agriculturists, and
commercial experts, with no armies but motives and
utilities at their back. Then only will foreign and
home politics be inseparably connected, whereas
to-day the latter follows its haughty dictator, and
gleans in sorry baskets the stubble that is left over
from the harvest of the former.



293.

Goal and Means of Democracy. — Democ-
racy tries to create and guarantee independence for
as many as possible in their opinions, way of life,
and occupation. For this purpose democracy must
withhold the political suffrage both from those who
have nothing and from those who are really rich, as
being the two intolerable classes of men. At the
removal of these classes it must always work, be-
cause they are continually calling its task in ques-
tion. In the same way democracy must prevent
all measures that seem to aim at party organisation.
For the three great foes of independence, in that
threefold sense, are the have-nots, the rich, and the



:i



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 345

parties. — I speak of democracy as of a thing to
come. What at present goes by that name is dis-
tinguished from older forms of government only by
the fact that it drives with new horses ; the roads
and the wheels are the same as of yore. — Has the
danger really become less with these conveyances of
the commonwealth ?



294.

Discretion and Success. — That great quality
of discretion, which is fundamentally the virtue of
virtues, their ancestress and queen, has in common
life by no means always success on its side. The
wooer would find himself deceived if he had wooed
that virtue only for the sake of success. For it
is rated by practical people as suspicious, and is
confused with cunning and hypocrisy: he who
obviously lacks discretion, the man who quickly
grasps and sometimes misses his grasp, has pre-
judice on his side — he is an honest, trustworthy
fellow. Practical people, accordingly, do not like
the prudent man, thinking he is to them a danger.
Moreover, we often assume the prudent man to be
anxious, preoccupied, pedantic — unpractical, butter-
fly people find him uncomfortable, because he does
not live in their happy-go-lucky way, without
thinking of actions and duties ; he appears among
them as their embodied conscience, and the bright
day is dimmed to their eyes before his gaze. Thus
when success and popularity fail him, he may often
say by way of private consolation, "So high are
the taxes you have to pay for the possession of the



34^ HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

most precious of human commodities — still it is
worth the price ! "

295.

Et in Arcadia Ego. — I looked down, over
waves of hills, to a milky-green lake, through firs
and pines austere with age; rocky crags of all
shapes about me, the soil gay with flowers and
grasses. A herd of cattle moved, stretched, and
expanded itself before me ; single cows and groups
in the distance, in the clearest evening light, hard
by the forest of pines ; others nearer and darker ;
all in calm and eventide contentment. My watch
pointed to half-past six. The bull of the herd had
stepped into the white foaming brook, and went
forward slowly, now striving against, now giving
way to his tempestuous course ; thus, no doubt, he
took his sort of fierce pleasure. Two dark brown
beings, of Bergamasque origin, tended the herd, the
girl dressed almost like a boy. On the left, over-
hanging cliffs and fields of snow above broad belts
of woodland ; to the right, two enormous ice-covered
peaks, high above me, shimmering in the veil of
the sunny haze — all large, silent, and bright. The
beauty of the whole was awe-inspiring and induced
to a mute worship of the moment and its revelation.
Unconsciously, as if nothing could be more natural,
you peopled this pure, clear world of light (which
had no trace of yearning, of expectancy, of looking
forward or backward) with Greek heroes. You felt
it all as Poussin and his school felt — at once heroic
and idyllic. — So individual men too have lived, con-
stantly feeling themselves in the world and the



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 347

world in themselves, and among them one of the
greatest men, the inventor of a heroico-idyllic form
of philosophy — Epicurus.

296.

Counting and Measuring. — The art of see-
ing many things, of weighing one with another, of
reckoning one thing with another and constructing
from them a rapid conclusion, a fairly correct sum
— that goes to make a great politician or general
or merchant. This quality is, in fact, a power of
speedy mental calculation. The art of seeing one
thing alone, of finding therein the sole motive for
action, the guiding principle of all other action,
goes to make the hero and also the fanatic. This
quality means a dexterity in measuring with one
scale.

297.

Not to See too Soon. — As long as we undergo
some experience, we must give ourselves up to the
experience and shut our eyes — in other words, not
become observers of what we are undergoing. For
to observe would disturb good digestion of the ex-
perience, and instead of wisdom we should gain noth-
ing but dyspepsia.

298.

From the Practice of the Wise.— To become
wise we must will to undergo certain experiences,
and accordingly leap into their jaws. This, it is
true, is very dangerous. Many a " sage " has been
eaten up in the process.



348 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

299.

Exhaustion of the Intellect. — Our occa-
sional coldness and indifference towards people,
which is imputed to us as hardness and defect of
character, is often only an exhaustion of the in-
tellect. In this state other men are to us, as we are
to ourselves, tedious or immaterial.

300.

" The One Thing Needful."— If we are clever,
the one thing we need is to have joy in our hearts.
" Ah," adds some one, " if we are clever, the best
thing we can do is to be wise."

301.

A Sign of Love. — Some one said, " There are
two persons about whom I have never thought
deeply. That is a sign of my love for them."

302.

How we Seek to Improve Bad Arguments.
— Many a man adds a bit of his personality to his
bad arguments, as if they would thus go better and
change into straight and good arguments. In the
same way, players at skittles, even after a throw,
try to give a direction to the ball by turns and
gestures.

303.
HONESTY. — It is but a small thing to be a pattern
sort of man with regard to rights and property — for



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 349

instance (to name trifling points, which of course
give a better proof of this sort of pattern nature
than great examples), if as a boy one never steals
fruit from another's orchard, and as a man never
walks on unmown fields. It is but little ; you are
then still only a " law-abiding person," with just that
degree of morality of which a " society," a group of
human beings, is capable.

304.
" MAN ! " — What is the vanity of the vainest in-
dividual as compared with the vanity which the
most modest person feels when he thinks of his
position in nature and in the world as " Man ! "

305.
The Most Necessary Gymnastic. — Through
deficiency in self-control in small matters a similar
deficiency on great occasions slowly arises. Every
day on which we have not at least once denied
ourselves some trifle is turned to bad use and a
danger to the next day. This gymnastic is indis-
pensable if we wish to maintain the joy of being
our own master.

306.

Losing Ourselves. — When we have first found
ourselves, we must understand how from time to
time to lose ourselves and then to find ourselves
again. — This is true on the assumption that we are
thinkers. A thinker finds it a drawback always to
be tied to one person.



350 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

307.

When it is Necessary to Part. — You must,
for a time at least, part from that which you want
to know and measure. Only when you have left a
city do you see how high its towers rise above its
houses.

308.

At Noontide. — He to whom an active and
.stormy morning of life is allotted, at the noontide
of life feels his soul overcome by a strange longing
for a rest that may last for months and years.
All grows .silent around him, voices sound farther
and farther in the distance, the sun shines straight
down upon him. On a hidden woodland sward
he sees the great God Pan sleeping, and with Pan
Nature seems to him to have gone to sleep with
an expression of eternity on their faces. He wants
nothing, he troubles about nothing ; his heart stands
still, only his eye lives. Jt is a death with waking
eyes. Then man .sees much that he never saw be-
fore, and, so far as his eye can reach, all is woven
into and as it were buried in a net of Jight. He
feels happy, but it is a heavy, very heavy kind
of happiness. — Then at last the wind stirs in the
trees, noontide is over, life carries him away again,
life with its blind eyes, and its tempestuous retinue
behind it — desire, illusion, oblivion, enjoyment,
destruction, decay. And so comes .evening, more
stormy and more active than was even the morn-
ing. — To the really active man these prolonged
phases of cognition seem almost uncanny and mor-
bid, but not unpleasant.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 35 1
309-

To Beware of One's Portrait-Painter.— A
great painter, who in a portrait has revealed and put
on canvas the fullest expression and look of which a
man is capable, will almost always think, when he
sees the man later in real life, that he is only look-
ing at a caricature.

310.

The Two Principles of the New Life. —
First Principle : to arrange one's life on the most
secure and tangible basis, not as hitherto upon the
most distant, undetermined, and cloudy foundation.
Second Principle-, to establish the rank of the
nearest and nearer things, and of the more and less
secure, before one arranges one's life and directs it
to a final end.

3ii.
Dangerous Irritability.— Talented men who
are at the same time idle will always appear some-
what irritated when one of their friends has accom-
plished a thorough piece of work. Their jealousy
is awakened, they are ashamed of their own lazi-
ness, or rather, they fear that their active friend will
now despise them even more than before. In such
a mood they criticise the new achievement, and, to
the utter astonishment of the author, their criticism
becomes a revenge.

312.

Destructions of Illusions. — Illusions are
certainly expensive amusements ; but the destruc-







352 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

tion of illusions is still more expensive, if looked
upon as an amusement, as it undoubtedly is by some
people.

313.

The Monotone of the " Sage."— Cows some-
times have a look of wondering which stops short
on the path to questioning. In the eye of the
higher intelligence, on the other hand, the nil admi-
rari is spread out like the monotony of the cloud-
less sky.

3H.
Not to be III TOO Long. — We should beware
of being ill too long. The lookers-on become im-
patient of their customary duty of showing sym-
pathy, because they find it too much trouble to
maintain the appearance of this emotion for any
length of time. Then they immediately pass to
suspicion of our character, with the conclusion :
" You deserve to be ill, and we need no longer be
at pains to show our sympathy."

315.
A Hint to Enthusiasts. — He who likes to
be carried away, and would fain be carried on high,
must beware lest he become too heavy. For in-
stance, he must not learn much, and especially not
let himself be crammed with science. Science
makes men ponderous — take care, ye enthusiasts !

316.

Knowledge of how to Surprise Oneself.
— He who would see himself as he is, must know



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 353

how to surprise himself, torch in hand. For with
the mind it is as with the body : whoever is ac-
customed to look at himself in the glass forgets
his ugliness, and only recognises it again by means
of the portrait-painter. Yet he even grows used
to the picture and forgets his ugliness all over
again. — Herein we see the universal law that man
cannot endure unalterable ugliness, unless for a
moment. He forgets or denies it in all cases. — The
moralists must reckon upon that " moment " for
bringing forward their truths.



317.

Opinions and Fish. — We are possessors of our
opinions as of fish — that is, in so far as we are pos-
sessors of a fish pond. We must go fishing and
have luck — then we have our fish, our opinions. I
speak here of live opinions, of live fish. Others are
content to possess a cabinet of fossils — and, in their
head, " convictions."



318.

Signs of Freedom and Servitude. — To
satisfy one's needs so far as possible oneself, even
if imperfectly, is the path towards freedom in mind
and personality. To satisfy many even superfluous
needs, and that as fully as possible, is a training
for servitude. The Sophist Hippias, who himself
earned and made all that he wore within and with-
out, is the representative of the highest freedom of
mind and personality. It does not matter whether

VOL. II. Z



354 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

all is done equally well and perfectly — pride can
repair the damaged places.



319.
Belief in Oneself. — In our times we mistrust
every one who believes in himself. Formerly this
was enough to make people believe in one. The
recipe for finding faith now runs : " Spare not thy-
self! In order to set thy opinion in a credible light,
thou must first set fire to thy own hut ! "

320.

At Once Richer and Poorer.— I know a
man who accustomed himself even in childhood
to think w r ell of the intellectuality of mankind — in
other words, of their real devotion as regards things
of the intellect, their unselfish preference for that
which is recognised as true — but who had at the
same time a modest or even depreciatory view of
his own brain (judgment, memory, presence of mind,
imagination). He set no value on himself when
he compared himself with others. Now in the
course of years he was compelled, first once and
then in a hundred ways, to revise this verdict. One
would have thought he would be thoroughly satis-
fied and delighted. Such, in fact, was to some ex-
tent the case, but, as he once said, " Yet a bitterness
of the deepest dye is mingled with my feeling, such
as I did not know in earlier life ; for since I learnt
to value men and myself more correctly, my intellect
seems to me of less use. I scarcely think I can
now do any good at all with it, because the minds



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 355

of others cannot understand the good. I now
always see before me the frightful gulf between
those who could give help and those who need
help. So I am troubled by the misfortune of having
my intellect to myself and of being forced to enjoy
it alone so far as it can give any enjoyment. But
to give is more blessed than to possess, and what is
the richest man in the solitude of a desert ? " *

321.

How WE SHOULD Attack. — The reasons for
which men believe or do not believe are in very few
people as strong as they might be. As a rule, in
order to shake a belief it is far from necessary to use
the heaviest weapon of attack. Many attain their ob-
ject by merely making the attack with some noise —
in fact, pop-guns are often enough. In dealing with
very vain persons, the semblance of a strong attack
is enough. They think they are being taken quite
seriously, and readily give way.

322.

DEATH. — Through the certain prospect of death
a precious, fragrant drop of frivolity might be mixed
with every life — and now, you singular druggist-
souls, you have made of death a drop of poison,
unpleasant to taste, which makes the whole of life
hideous.

323-

Repentance. — Never allow repentance free play,

* Clearly autobiographical. Nietzsche, like all great men,
passed through a period of modesty and doubt. — Tr.






356 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.



but say at once to yourself, " That would be add-
ing a second piece of folly to the first" If you
have worked evil, you must bethink yourself of
doing good. If you are punished for your actions,
submit to the punishment with the feeling that by
this very submission you are somehow doing good,
in that you are deterring others from falling into
the same error. Every malefactor who is punished
has a right to consider himself a benefactor to
mankind.

324.
Becoming a Thinker. — How can any one be-
come a thinker if he does not spend at least a third
part of the day without passions, men, and books ?

325.
The Best Remedy. — A little health on and off
is the best remedy for the invalid.

326.

Don't Touch. — There are dreadful people who,
instead of solving a problem, complicate it for those
who deal with it and make it harder to solve.*
Whoever does not know how to hit the nail on the
head should be entreated not to hit the nail at all.

327.
Forgetting Nature. — We speak of Nature,
and, in doing so, forget ourselves : we ourselves are

* Nietzsche here alludes to his own countrymen. — Tr.






THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 357

Nature, quand meme. — Consequently, Nature is
something quite different from what we feel on hear-
ing her name pronounced.

328.

Profundity and Ennui. — In the case of pro-
found men, as of deep wells, it takes a long time
before anything that is thrown into them reaches
the bottom. The spectators, who generally do not
wait long enough, too readily look upon such a man
as callous and hard — or even as boring.

329.
When it is Time to Vow Fidelity to One-
self. — We sometimes go astray in an intellectual
direction which does not correspond to our talents.
For a time we struggle heroically against wind and
tide, .really against ourselves ; but finally we become
weary and we pant. What we accomplish gives us
no real pleasure, since we think that we have paid too
heavy a price for these successes. We even despair
of our productivity, of our future, perhaps in the
midst of victory. — Finally, finally we turn back — and
then the wind swells our sails and bears us into our
smooth water. What bliss ! How certain of victory
we feel ! Only now do we know what we are and
what we intend, and now we vow fidelity to our-
selves, and have a right to do so — as men that know.

330.
Weather Prophets.— Just as the clouds reveal
to us the direction of the wind high above our



358 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

heads, so the lightest and freest spirits give signs of
future weather by their course. The wind in the
valley and the market-place opinions of to-day have
no significance for the future, but only for the past.

331.
Continual Acceleration. — Those who begin
slowly and find it hard to become familiar with
a subject, sometimes acquire afterwards the quality
of continual acceleration — so that in the end no one
knows where the current will take them.

332.
The Three Good Things.— Greatness, calm,
sunlight — these three embrace all that a thinker
desires and also demands of himself: his hopes
and duties, his claims in the intellectual and moral
sphere, nay even in his daily manner of life and
the scenic background of his residence. Corre-
sponding to these three things are, firstly thoughts
that exalt, secondly thoughts that soothe, and
thirdly thoughts that illuminate — but, fourthly,
thoughts that share in all these three qualities, in
which all earthly things are transfigured. This is
the kingdom of the great trinity of joy.

333-
Dying FOR " Truth." — We should not let our-
selves be burnt for our opinions — we are not so cer-
tain of them as all that. But we might let ourselves
be burnt for the right of possessing and changing
our opinions.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 359
334-

Market Value. — If we wish to pass exactly
for what we are, we must be something that has its
market value. As, however, only objects in com-
mon use have a market value, this desire is the
consequence either of shrewd modesty or of stupid
immodesty.

335-
Moral for Builders. — We must remove the
scaffolding when the house has been built.

336.
SOPHOCLEANISM. — Who poured more water into
wine than the Greeks ? Sobriety and grace com-
bined — that was the aristocratic privilege of the
Athenian in the time of Sophocles and after. Imi-
tate that whoever can ! In life and in work !

337-
Heroism. — The heroic consists in doing some-
thing great (or in nobly not doing something) with-
out feeling oneself to be in competition with or
before others. The hero carries with him, wherever
he goes, the wilderness and the holy land with in-
violable precincts.

338.
Finding our " Double " in Nature. — In some
country places we rediscover ourselves, with a de-
lightful shudder : it is the pleasantest way of find-
ing our " double." — How happy must he be who has






360 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

that feeling just here, in this perpetually sunny
October air, in this happy elfin play of the wind
from morn till eve, in this clearest of atmospheres
and mildest of temperatures, in all the serious yet
cheerful landscape of hill, lake, and forest on this
plateau, which has encamped fearlessly next to the
terrors of eternal snow : here, where Italy and Fin-
land have joined hands, and where the home of all
the silver colour-tones of Nature seems to be estab-
lished. How happy must he be who can say, " True,
there are many grander and finer pieces of scenery,
but this is so familiar and intimate to me, related
by blood, nay even more to me ! "



339-

Affability of the Sage. — The sage will un-
consciously be affable in his intercourse with other
men, as a prince would be, and will readily treat
them as equals, in spite of all differences of talent,
rank, and character. For this characteristic, how-
ever, so scon as people notice it, he is most heavily
censured.

340.

Gold. — All that is gold does not glitter. A soft
sheen characterises the most precious metal.



341.

Wheel and Drag.— The wheel and the drag
have different duties, but also one in common — that
of hurting each other.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 361

342.

Disturbances of the Thinker. — All that in-
terrupts the thinker in his thoughts (disturbs him,
as people say) must be regarded by him calmly, as
a new model who comes in by the door to offer
himself to the artist. Interruptions are the ravens
which bring food to the recluse.

343-
Being very Clever. — Being very clever keeps
men young, but they must put up with being con-
sidered, for that very reason, older than they are.
For men read the handwriting of the intellect as
signs of experiejice — that is, of having lived much and
evilly, of suffering, error, and repentance. Hence, if
we are very clever and show it, we appear to them
older and wickeder than we are.



344-

How we must Conquer. — We ought not to
desire victory if we only have the prospect of over-
coming our opponent by a hair's breadth. A good
victory makes the vanquished rejoice, and must have
about it something divine which spares humiliation.

345-

An Illusion of Superior Minds. — Superior
minds find it difficult to free themselves from an
illusion ; for they imagine that they excite envy
among the mediocre and are looked upon as ex-



362 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.






ceptions. As a matter of fact, however, they are
looked upon as superfluous, as something that would
not be missed if it did not exist.



346.

Demanded by Cleanliness. — Changing opin-
ions is in some natures as much demanded by clean-
liness as changing clothes. In the case of other
natures it is only demanded by vanity.

347.

Also Worthy of a Hero. — Here is a hero who
did nothing but shake the tree as soon as the fruits
were ripe. Do you think that too small a thing ?
Well, just look at the tree that he shook.

348.

A Gauge for Wisdom. — The growth of wisdom
may be gauged exactly by the diminution of ill-
temper.

349-
Expressing an Error disagreeably. — It is
not to every one's taste to hear truth pleasantly ex-
pressed. But let no one at least believe that error
will become truth if it is disagreeably expressed.

3SO.

The Golden Maxim. — Man has been bound
with many chains, in order that he may .forget to



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 363

comport himself like an animal. And indeed he
has become more gentle, more intellectual, more
joyous, more meditative than any animal. But now
he still suffers from having carried his chains so long,
from having been so long without pure air and free
movement — these chains, however, are, as I repeat
again and again, the ponderous and significant
errors of moral, religious, and metaphysical ideas.
Only when the disease of chains is overcome is the
first great goal reached — the separation of man from
the brute. At present we stand in the midst of our
work of removing the chains, and in doing so we
need the strictest precautions. Only the ennobled
man may be granted freedom of spirit ; to him
alone comes the alleviation of life and heals his
wounds ; he is the first who can say that he lives
for the sake of joy, with no other aim ; in any other
mouth, his motto of " Peace around me and good-
will towards all the most famUiar things," would be
dangerous. — In this motto for single individuals he
is thinking of an ancient saying, magnificent and
pathetic, which applied to all, and has remained
standing above all mankind, as a motto and a
beacon whereby shall perish all who adorn their
banner too early — the rock on which Christianity
foundered. It is not even yet time, it seems, for all
men to have the lot of those shepherds who saw the
heavens lit up above them and heard the words :
"Peace on earth and goodwill to one another among

men." — It is still the age of the individual.

******



364 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

The Shadow. Of all that you have enunciated,
nothing pleased me more than one promise : " Ye
want again to be good neighbours to the most
familiar things." This will be to the advantage of
us poor shadows too. For do but confess that you
have hitherto been only too fond of reviling us.

The Wanderer-. Reviling? But why did you
never defend yourselves ? After all, you were very
close to our ears.

The Shadow : It seemed to us that we were too
near you to have a right to talk of ourselves.

The Wanderer-. What delicacy! Ah, you shadows
are " better men " * than we, I can see that.

The Shadow : And yet you called us " importu-
nate " — us, who know one thing at least extremely
well : how to be silent and to wait — no Englishman
knows it better. It is true we are very, very often
in the retinue of men, but never as their bondsmen.
When man shuns light, we shun man — so far, at least,
we are free.

The Wanderer : Ah, light shuns man far oftener,
and then also you abandon him.

The Shadow : It has often pained me to leave you.
I am eager for knowledge, and much in man has re-
mained obscure to me, because I cannot always be in
his company. At the price of complete knowledge
of man I would gladly be your slave.

The Wanderer: Do you know, do I know, whether
you would not then unwittingly become master in-

* An allusion to the poem " Der Wilde " (The Savage) by
Saume, which ends with the line, " Sehet, wir wilden sind doch
bessere Menschen " (Behold, after all, we savages are better
men). — Tr.



THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW. 365

stead of slave ? Or would remain a slave indeed, but
would lead a life of humiliation and disgust because
you despised your master ? Let us both be content
with freedom such as you have enjoyed up to now —
you and I ! For the sight of a being not free would
embitter my greatest joys ; all that is best would be
repugnant to me if any one had to share it with me
— I will not hear of any slaves about me. That is
why I do not care for the dog, that lazy, tail-
wagging parasite, who first became " doggish" as the
slave of man, and of whom they still say that he is
loyal to his master and follows him like

The Shadow : Like his shadow, they say. Per-
haps I have already followed you too long to-day ?
It has been the longest day, but we are nearing the
end ; be patient a little more ! The grass is damp ;
I am feeling chilly.

The Wanderer : Oh, is it already time to part ?
And I had to hurt you in the end — I saw you be-
came darker.

The Shadoiv : I blushed the only colour I have at
command. I remembered that I had often lain at
your feet like a dog, and that you then

The Wanderer: Can I not with all speed do some-
thing to please you ? Have you no wish ?

The Shadow : None, except perhaps the wish that
the philosophic " dog " * expressed to Alexander the
Great — just move a little out of my light ; I feel
cold.

The Wanderer : What am I to do ?



* Diogenes, founder of the Cynic school, which derived its
name from kvwv (dog). — Tr.



366 HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN.

The Shadow : Walk under those fir-trees and look
around you towards the mountains ; the sun is
sinking.

The Wanderer : Where are you ? Where are
you? |.