PREFACE

I relieve myself a little. It is not solely out of
sheer wickedness that I praise Bizet at the expense of
Wagner in this work. In the midst of much pleasantry,
I bring forward a case which is serious enough. It
was my fate to turn the back on Wagner ; to be fond
of aught afterwards was a triumph. No one, perhaps,
had been more dangerously entangled in Wagnerism,
no one has defended himself harder against it, no one
has been more glad to get rid of it. A long history !
Is there a word wanted for it ? If I were a moralist,
who knows how I should designate it ! Perhaps self-
overcoming. But the philosopher never loves mora
lists . . . neither does he love fancy words . . .

What does a philosopher firstly and lastly require
of himself ? To overcome his age in himself, to become
"timeless." With what, then, has he to wage the
hardest strife ? With the characteristics in which he is
just the child of his age. Well ! I am the child of this



2 PREFACE

age, just like Wagner, / . e., a decadent ; I am, however,
conscious of it ; I defended myself against it. My
philosophic spirit defended itself against it.

The problem of decadence is, in fact, that which
has occupied me most profoundly ; I have had
reasons for it. "Good and Evil" is only a variety of
that problem. When one has learned to discern the
symptoms of decline, one also understands morality,
one understands what conceals itselt under its holiest
names and valuation-formube ; namely, impoverished
life, desire for the end, great lassitude. Morality nega
tives life . . . For such a task I required some self-
discipline : I had to engage in combat against whatever
was morbid in me, including Wagner, including Schopen
hauer, including all modern " humanity. "A pro
found estrangement, coolness, and sobriety with refe
rence to everything temporary or opportune ; and as
my highest wish, the eye of Zarathustra, an eye,
which, exalted to an immense height, surveys the
whole phenomenon of man, looks down on it ...
To attain such an object what sacrifice would not
be appropriate ? What " self-overcoming ! " What " self-
denying ! "

My most important experience was a convalescence ;
Wagner belongs only to my maladies.

Not that I would wish to be ungrateful to this
malady. If in this work I maintain the proposition
that Wagner is hurtful, I want none the less to



PREFACE 3

maintain to whom, in spite of it all, Wagner is indis
pensable to the philosopher. In other departments
people may perhaps get along without Wagner ; the
philosopher, however, is not free to dispense with him.
The philosopher has to be the bad conscience of his
time ; for that purpose he must possess its best know
ledge. But where would he find a better initiated
guide for the labyrinth of modern soul, a more elo
quent psychological expert than Wagner? Modernism
speaks its most familiar language in Wagner : it con
ceals neither its good nor its evil, it has lost all its
sense of shame. And reversely : when one has formed
a clear notion about what is good and evil in Wagner,
one has almost determined the value of modernism.
I understand perfectly, when a musician says now, " I
hate Wagner, but I no longer stand any other music. "
I should however also understand a philosopher who
declared, " Wagner siimmarises modernism. There is
no help for it ; we must first be Wagnerians "...



I heard yesterday will you believe it ? the
masterpiece of Bizet for the twentieth time. I again
held out with meek devotion, I again succeeded in
not running away. This victory over my impatience
surprises me. How such a work -perfects one ! One
becomes a " masterpiece " one s self by its influence.
And really, I have appeared to myself, every time I
have heard Carmen, to be more of a philosopher, a
better philosopher than at other times : I have become

so patient, so happy, so Indian, so sedate Five

hours sitting : the first stage of holiness ! May I ven
ture to say that Bizet s orchestra music is almost the
sole orchestration I yet endure ? That other orchestra
music which is all the rage at present, the Wagnerian
orchestration, at once brutal, artificial, and " innocent "
thereby speaking to the three senses of modern
soul at the same time, ho\v detrimental to me is
that Wagnerian orchestration ! I call it the Sirocco.






THE CASE OF WAGNER

An unpleasant sweat breaks out on me. My good
time is at an end.

This music seems to me to be perfect. It ap
proaches lightly, nimbly, and with courtesy. It is ami
able, it does not produce sweat. " What is good is easy ;
everything divine runs with light feet : " the first
proposition of my ^Esthetics. This music is wicked,
subtle, and fatalistic ; it remains popular at the same
time, it has the subtlety of a race, not of an indi
vidual. It is rich. It is precise. It builds, it organises,
it completes ; it is thus the antithesis to the polypus
in music, " infinite melody. " Have more painful,
tragic accents ever been heard on the stage ? And
how are they obtained ? Without grimace ! Without
counterfeit coinage ! Without the imposture of the
grand style ! Finally, this music takes the auditor for
an intelligent being, even for a musician ; here also
Bizet is the contrast to Wagner, who, whatever else
he was, was certainly the most un courteous genius in
the world. (Wagner takes us just as if , he says
a thing again and again until one despairs, until one
believes it.)

And once more, I become a better man when this
Bizet exhorts me. Also a better musician, a better
auditor. Is it at all possible to listen better ? I bury
my ears under this music, I hear the very reason
of it. I seem to assist at its production I tremble
before dangers which accompany any hazardous



THE CASE OF WAGNER 7

enterprise, I am enraptured by strokes of good
fortune of which Bizet is innocent. And, curiously
enough, I don t think of it after all, or I don t know
how much I think of it. For quite other thoughts
run through my mind at the time . . . Has it been
noticed that music makes the spirit free f that it gives
wings to thought ? that one becomes so much more
a philosopher, the more one becomes a musician ?
The grey heaven of abstraction thrilled, as it were,
by lightnings ; the light strong enough for all the
filigree of things ; the great problems ready to be
grasped ; the universe surveyed as from a mountain
summit. I have just defined philosophical pathos.
And answers fall into my lap unexpectedly ; a little
hail-shower of ice and wisdom, of solved problems . . .
Where am I ? Bizet makes me productive. All that
is good makes me productive. I have no other grati
tude, nor have I any other proof of what is good.



This work saves also ; Wagner is not the only
" Saviour. " With Bizet s work one takes leave of the
humid north, and all the steam of the Wagnerian
ideal. Even the dramatic action saves us there
from. It has borrowed from Merimee the logic in
passion, the shortest route, stern necessity. It
possesses, above all, what belongs to the warm cli-



THE CASE OF WAGNER

mate, the dry ness of the air, its limpidezza. Here,
in all respects, the climate is altered. Here a dif
ferent sensuality expresses itself, a different sensi
bility, a different gaiety. This music is gay ; but it
has not a French or a German gaiety. Its gaiety is
African ; destiny hangs over it, its happiness is short,
sudden, and without forgiveness. I envy Bizet for
having had the courage for this sensibility, which did
not hitherto find expression in the cultured music
of Europe this more southern, more tawny, more
scorched sensibility . . . How the yellow afternoons
of its happiness benefit us ! We contemplate the out
look : did we ever see the sea smoother ? And how
tranquilisingly the Moorish dance appeals to us ! How
even our insatiability learns for once to be satiated
with its lascivious melancholy ! Finally, love, love
retranslated again into natiire / Not the love of a
" cultured maiden ! " No Senta - sentimentality ! * But
love as fate, as fatality, cynical, innocent, cruel, and
thus true to nature ! Love, which in its expedients
is the war of the sexes, and in its basis their mortal
hatred. I know of no case where tragic humour,
which forms the essence of love, has expressed itself
so strenuously, has formulated itself so terribly, as in
the last cry of Don Jose, with which the work con
cludes : yes ! / myself have killed her ;

Oh my Carmen ! my Carmen adored ! "

* Senta is one of Wagner s female personages.



THE CASE OF WAGNER 9

Such a conception of love (the only one which
is worthy of a philosopher) is rare ; it distinguishes a
work of art among thousands of others. For, on an
average, artists do like all the world, or worse even
they misunderstand love. Wagner also has mis
understood it. People imagine they are unselfish in
love because they seek the advantage of another
being, often in opposition to their own advantage.
But for so doing they want to possess the other
being . . . Even God himself is no exception to this
rule. He is far from thinking, " What need you
trouble about it, if I love you ? " he becomes a
terror, if he is not loved in return. L Amour with
this word one gains one s case with gods and men
est de toits les sentiments le plus egoiste, et, par con
sequent, lorsqu il cst bless e, le moins genereux (B.
Constant).



You already see how much this music improves
me ? // faut meditcrraniser la musique : I have
reasons for using this formula (Beyond Good and Evil,
Nr. 255). The return to nature, to health, to gaiety, to
youth, and to virtue ! And yet I was one of the
most corrupt of the Wagnerians ... I was capable of
taking Wagner seriously . . . Ah, this old magician !
to what extent has he imposed upon us ! The first
thing his art furnishes is a magnifying -glass. We



IO THE CASE OF WAGNER

look into it, we don t trust our eyes everything be
comes great, even Wagner becomes great . . . What
a wise rattlesnake ! All his life he has rattled before
us about "devotion," about "loyalty," about "purity;"
with a panegyric on chastity, he withdrew from the
corrupt world ! And we have believed him . . .

But you do not listen to me ? You prefer even
the problem of Wagner to that of Bizet ? I don t
undervalue it myself, it has its charm. The problem
of salvation is even a venerable problem. There is
nothing which Wagner has meditated on more pro
foundly than salvation ; his opera is the opera of sal
vation. Someone always wants to be saved in Wagner s
works ; at one time it is some little man, at another
time it is some little woman that is his problem.
And with what opulence he varies his leading motive !
What rare, what profound sallies ! Who was it but
Wagner taught us that innocence has a preference
for saving interesting sinners (the case in Tann-
hduser] ? Or that even the Wandering Jew will be
saved, will become settled, if he marries (the case in
the Flying Dutchman] ? Or that corrupt old women
prefer to be saved by chaste youths (the case of
Kundry in Parsifal] ? Or that young hysterics like
best to be saved by their doctor (the case in
Lohengrin] ? Or that handsome girls like best to be
saved by a cavalier who is a Wagnerian (the case
in the Master-singers] ? Or that even married women



THE CASE OF WAGNER I I

are willingly saved by a cavalier (the case of Isolde] ?
Or that "the old God," after he has compromised
himself morally in every respect, is finally saved by a
freethinker and immoralist (the case in the Nibelung s
Ring] ? Admire especially this last profundity ! Do
you understand it ? I take good care not to understand
it ... That other lessons also may be derived from
these w r orks, I would rather prove than deny. That
one can be brought to despair by a Wagnerian
ballet and to virtue (once more the case of Tann-
hduser] \ That the worst consequences may result if
one does not go to bed at the right time (once more
the case of Lohengrin]. That one should never know
too exactly whom one marries (for the third time the
case of Lohengrin], Tristan and Isolde extols the
perfect husband, who on a certain occasion has only
one question in his mouth : " But why have you not
told me that sooner ? Nothing was simpler than that ! "
Answer : In truth : cannot tell it&gt;

"What them dost ask

Remains for aye unanswered. "

Lohengrin contains a solemn proscription of investi
gation and questioning. Wagner, accordingly, ad
vocates the Christian doctrine, "Thou shalt believe,
and must believe. " It is an offence against the highest
and holiest to be scientific . . . The Flying Dutchman
preaches the sublime doctrine that woman makes even
the most vagabond person settle down, or, in Wagnerian



12 THE CASE OF WAGNER

language, "saves" him. Here we take the liberty to
ask a question. Granted that it is true, would it at
the same time be desirable ? What becomes of the
" Wandering Jew, " adored and settled down by a
woman ? He simply ceases to be the eternal wanderer,
he marries,, and is of no more interest to us. Trans
lated into actuality : the danger of artists, of geniuses
for these are the " Wandering Jews "lies in
woman : adoring women are their ruin. Hardly
anyone has sufficient character to resist being cor
rupted being " saved " when he finds himself treated
as a god : he forthwith condescends to woman. Man
is cowardly before all that is eternally feminine :
women know it. In many cases of feminine love
(perhaps precisely in the most celebrated cases), love
is only a more refined parasitism, a nestling in a
strange soul, sometimes even in a strange body
Ah ! at what expense always to " the host " - - !

Goethe s fate in moralic-acid, old-maidenish Ger
many is known. He was always a scandal to the
Germans ; he has had honest admirers only among
Jewesses. Schiller, " noble " Schiller, who blustered
round their ears w r ith high-flown phrases, he was
according to their taste. Why did they reproach
Goethe ? For the " Mountain of Venus, " and because
he had composed Venetian epigrams. Klopstock had
already preached to him on morals ; there was a time
when Herder had a preference for the word "Priapus,"



THE CASE OF WAGNER 13

when speaking of Goethe. Even Wilhelm Meister
was only regarded as a symptom of decadence, of
" going to the dogs " in morals. The " menagerie of
tame cattle " which it exhibits, and the " meanness " of
the hero, exasperated Xiebuhr, for example, who finally
breaks out into a lamentation which Biterolf* might
have chanted : " Hardly anything can produce a more
painful impression than a great mind despoiling itself
of its wings, and seeking its virtuosity in something
far lower, while it renounces the higher" . . . The
cultured maiden was however especially roused : all the
little courts every sort of " Wartburg " in Germany-
crossed themselves before Goethe, before the " unclean
spirit " in Goethe. Wagner has set this history to
music. He saves Goethe, that goes without saying,
but he does it in such a way that he adroitly takes
the part of the cultured maiden at the same time.
Goethe is saved ; a prayer saves him, a cultured
maiden draws him iipivard . . .

What Goethe would have thought of Wagner ?
Goethe once proposed to himself the question, " What
is the danger which hovers over all romanticists : the
fate of the romanticist ?" His answer was, "Suffocation
by chewing moral and religious absurdities over
again. " In fewer words : Parsifal -The philosopher
adds an epilogue to that answer. Holiness the
last of the higher values perhaps still seen by the

* A personage in Wagner s Tannhduser.



14 THE CASE OF WAGNER

populace and woman, the horizon of the ideal for
all who are naturally myopic. For philosophers,
however, it is like every other horizon, a mere misap
prehension, a sort of door-closing of the region where
their world only commences their danger, their
ideal, their desirability . . . Expressed more politely :
la philosophic ne sujfit pas au grand nombre. II
hii faut la saintete.



I further recount the story of the Nibelung s
Ring. It belongs to this place. It is also a story
of salvation, only, this time, it is Wagner himself who
is saved. For the half of his life, Wagner has believed
in revolution, as none but a Frenchman has ever
believed in it. He sought for it in the Runic cha
racters of myths, he believed that he found in Sieg
fried the typical revolutionist. " Whence comes all the
evil in the world ? " Wagner asked himself. From " old
conventions" he answered, like every revolutionary
ideologist. That means from customs, laws, morals,
and institutions, from all that the old world, old
society rest on. " How does one get rid of the evil
in the world ? How does one do away with old
society ?" Only by declaring war against "conventions"
(traditional usage and morality). That is what Sieg
fried does. He commences early with it, very early :
his procreation already is a declaration of war against



THE CASE OF WAGNER I 5

morality he comes into the world through adultery
and incest ... It is not the legend, but Wagner who
is the inventor of this radical trait ; on this point he
has corrected the legend . . . Siegfried continues as
he commenced : he follows only the first impulse,
he casts aside all tradition, all reverence, all fear.
Whatever displeases him, he stabs down. He runs
irreverently to the attack on the old Deities. His
principal undertaking, however, is for the purpose of
emancipating woman " saving Brunnhilde "... Sieg
fried and Brunnhilde ; the sacrament of free love ;
the dawn of the golden age ; the twilight of the
Gods of old morality ! evil is done away with . . .
Wagner s vessel ran merrily on this course for a
long time. Here, undoubtedly, Wagner sought his
highest goal. What happened ? A misfortune. The
vessel went on a reef ; Wagner was run aground.
The reef was Schopenhauer s philosophy ; Wagner
was run aground on a contrary view of things. What
had he set to music ? Optimism. Wagner was ashamed.
In addition, it was an optimism for which Schopen
hauer had formed a malicious epithet infamous
optimism. He was once more ashamed. He thought
long over it ; his situation seemed desperate ... A
way out of the difficulty finally dawned on his mind.
The reef on which he was wrecked how would
it be if he interpreted it as the goal, the ultimate
purpose, the real meaning of his voyage ? To be



I 6 THE CASE OF WAGNER

wrecked here that was a goal also. Bene navigavi
cum naufragium fed . . . And he translated the
Nibelung s Ring into Schopenhauerism. Everything
goes wrong, everything goes to ruin, the new world
is as bad as the old. Nothingness, the Indian Circe,
makes a sign . . . Brunnhilde, who according to the
earlier design had to take leave with a song in
honour of free love, solacing the world in anticipation
of a Socialistic Utopia in which " all will be well, " has
now something else to do. She has first to study
Schopenhauer ; she has to put into verse the fourth
book of the " World as Will and Representation. "
Wanner was saved ... In all seriousness, that was a

o

salvation. The service for which Wagner is indebted
to Schopenhauer is immense. It was only the philo
sopher of decadence who enabled the artist of deca
dence to discover himself.



The artist of decadence that is the word. And
it is here that my seriousness commences. I am not
at all inclined to be a quiet spectator, when this
decadent ruins our health and music along with it.
Is Wagner a man at all ? Is he not rather a disease ?
Everything he touches he makes morbid he has made
music morbid.

A typical decadent, who feels himself necessary
with his corrupt taste, who claims that it is a higher



THE CASE OF WAGNER I 7

taste, who knows how to make his depravity be
regarded as a law, as a progress, as fulfilment.

And nobody defends himself. Wagner s power of
seduction becomes prodigious, the smoke of incense
steams around him, the misunderstanding about him
calls itself " Gospel " it is by no means the poor in
spirit exclusively whom he has convinced.

I should like to open the windows a little. Air !
More air !

It does not surprise me that people deceive them
selves about Wagner in Germany. The contrary
would surprise me. The Germans have created for
themselves a Wagner whom they can worship; they
were never psychologists, they are grateful by mis
understanding. But that people also deceive them
selves about Wagner in Paris ! where people are almost
nothing else but psychologists. And in St. Petersburg !
where things are still divined which are not divined
even in Paris. How intimately related to the entire
European decadence must Wagner be, when he is
not recognised by it as a decadent. He belongs
to it : he is its Protagonist, its greatest name . . .
People honour themselves by exalting him to the
skies. For it is already a sign of decadence that
no one defends himself against Wagner. Instinct is
weakened. What should be shunned attracts people.
What drives still faster into the abyss is put to
the lips. You want an example? One need only



I 8 THE CASE OF WAGNER

observe the regime which the anaemic, the gouty, and
the diabetic prescribe for themselves. Definition of
the vegetarian : a being who needs a strengthening
diet. To recognise what is hurtful, as hurtful, to be
able to deny one s self \vhat is hurtful, is a sign of youth
and vitality. The exhausted is allured by what is
hurtful ; the vegetarian by his pot-herbs. Disease itself
may be a stimulus to life : only, a person must be
sound enough for such a stimulus ! Wagner increases
exhaustion ; it is on that account that he allures
the weak and exhausted. Oh, the rattlesnake joy of
the old master, when he always saw just " the little
children " come to him !

I give prominence to this point of view : Wagner s
art is morbid. The problems which he brings upon
the stage nothing but problems of hysterics , the
convulsiveness of his emotion, his over-excited sensi
bility, his taste, which always asked for stronger
stimulants, his instability, which he disguised as prin
ciples, and, not least, the choice of his heroes and
heroines, regarded as physiological types (a gallery
of morbid individuals ! ) : altogether these symptoms
represent a picture of disease about which there can
be no mistake. Wagner est unc nevrose. Nothing
is perhaps better known at present, at any rate
nothing is studied more than the Protean character
of degeneracy, which here crystallises as art and artist.
Our physicians and physiologists have in Wagner



THE CASE OF WAGNER ig

their most interesting case, at least a very complete
case. Just because nothing is more modern than this
entire morbidness, this decrepitude and over-excitability
of the nervous mechanism, Wagner is the modern
artist par excellence, the Cagliostro of modernism.
In his art there is mixed, in the most seductive manner,
the things at present most necessary for everybody
the three great stimulants of the exhausted, brutality,
artifice, and innocence (idiocy).

Wagner is a great ruin for music. He has
divined in music the expedient for exciting fatigued
nerves he has thus made music morbid. He pos
sesses no small inventive ability in the art of pricking
up once more the most exhausted, and calling back
to life those who are half-dead. He is the master of
hypnotic passes, he upsets, like the bulls, the very
strongest. The success of Wagner his success on
the nerves, and consequently on women has made
all the ambitious musical world disciples of his magical
art. And not the ambitious only, the shrewd also . .
At present money is only made by morbid music,
our great theatres live by Wagner.



I again allow myself a little gaiety. I suppose
the case that the Success of Wagner became embodied,
took form, and that, disguised as a philanthropic



2O THE CASE OF WAGNER

musical savant, it mixed among young artists. How
do you think it would express itself under the cir
cumstances ?

My friends, it would say, let us have five words
among ourselves. It is easier to make bad music
than good music. What, if, apart from that, it were
also more advantageous ? more effective, more per
suasive, more inspiriting, more sure ? more Wagnerian ?
Pulchruvi est paucorum hominuvi. Bad enough ! We
understand Latin, we perhaps also understand our
advantage. The beautiful has its thorns ; we are aware
of that. What is the good, then, of beauty ? Why
not rather the grand, the sublime, the gigantic, that
which moves the masses ? And once more : it is
easier to be gigantic than to be beautiful ; we are
aware of that . . .

We know the masses, we know the theatre. The
best that sit in it, German youths, horned Siegfrieds
and other Wagnerians, require the sublime, the pro
found, the overpowering. Thus much we can ac
complish. And the others that sit in the theatre
the culture - cretins, the little biases, the eternally
feminine, the good digesters, in short the people
similarly require the sublime, the profound, and the
overpowering. Those have all one kind of logic.
" He who upsets us is strong ; he who raises us is
divine ; he who makes us imaginative is profound. "
Let us decide, Messrs, the musicians : let us upset



THE CASE OF WAGNER 2 I

them, let us raise them, let us make them imaginative.
Thus much we can accomplish.

As regards the making imaginative, it is here that
our conception of " style " has its starting point. Above
all, there must be no thought ! Nothing is more com
promising than a thought ! But the state of mind which
precedes thought, the travail of yet unborn thoughts,
the promise of future thoughts, the world as it w r as
before God created it a recrudescence of chaos . . .
chaos makes imaginative . . .

In the language of the master : infinity, but without
melody.

In the second place, as concerns the upsetting, it
already belongs in part to physiology. Let us study
first of all the instruments. Some of them persuade
even the bo\vels (they open the doors, as Handel
says), others charm the spinal marrow. The colour
of sound is decisive here ; what resounds is almost
indifferent. Let us refine on this point ! What is the
use of wasting ourselves on other matters ? Let us be
characteristic in sound, even to foolishness ! It is
attributed to our genius when we give much to con
jecture in our sounds ! Let us irritate the nerves, let
us strike them dead, let us make use of lightning and
thunder, that upsets . .

Above all, however, passion upsets. Let there
be no misunderstanding among us with regard to
passion. Nothing is less expensive than passion. One



22 THE CASE OF WAGNER

can dispense with all the virtues of counterpoint, one
need not have learned anything, one can always
use passion. Beauty is difficult: let us guard ourselves
against beauty ! . . . And melody still more ! Let us
disparage, my friends, let us disparage, if we are
serious about the ideal, let us disparage melody !
Nothing is more dangerous than a fine melody !
Nothing more certainly ruins the taste. We are lost,
my friends, if fine melodies are again loved ! . . .

Principle : Melody is immoral. Proof : Palestrina.
Application : Parsifal. The \vant of melody even
sanctifies . . .

And this is the definition of passion. Passion
or the gymnastics of the loathsome on the rope of
enharmonics. Let us dare, my friends, to be loath
some ! Wagner has dared it ! Let us splash before us,
undismayed, the mire of the most odious harmonies !
Let us not spare our hands ! It is thus only that we
become natural . . .

A last counsel ! Perhaps it embraces all in one :
Let us be idealists ! If this is not the most expedient
thing we can do, it is at least the wisest. In order
to raise men, we ourselves must be exalted. Let us
walk above the clouds, let us harangue the infinite,
let us surround ourselves with grand symbols ! Sur-
suin ! Bumbuui ! there is no better counsel. Let
" fulness of heart " be our argument ; let " fine feeling "
be our advocate. Virtue still wins the case against



THE CASE OF WAGNER 23

counterpoint. " He who makes us better how could
it be that he was not good himself ? " such has always
been the conclusion of mankind. Let us therefore
make mankind better ! one thereby becomes good
(one thereby becomes " classic " even : Schiller became
a "classic"). Seeking after ignoble sense -excitement,
after so-called beauty, has enervated the Italians ; let
us remain German ! Even Mozart s relation to music
Wagner has told us by way of consolation ! was
frivolous after all ... Let us never admit that music
" serves for recreation, " that it " cheers up, " that it " fur
nishes enjoyment. " Let us never furnish enjoyment !
we are lost, if people again think of art as hedonis
tic ... That belongs to the bad eighteenth century . . .
On the other hand, nothing might be more advisable
(we say it apart) than a dose of hypocrisy, sit venia
verbo. That gives dignity. And let us choose the
hour when it is suitable to look black, to sigh publicly,
to sigh in a Christian manner, to exhibit large Christian
sympathy. " Man is depraved : who will save him ? What
will save hivi?" Let us not answer. Let us be careful.
Let us struggle against our ambition, which would
like to found religions. But nobody must venture to
doubt that we save him, that our music alone brings
salvation . . . (Wagner s Essay, " Religion and Art ").



24 THE CASE OF WAGNER

7

Enough ! Enough ! I fear sinister reality will
have been too plainly recognised under my cheerful
lines the picture of a decline in art, of a decline
also in the artists. The latter, a decline of character,
would perhaps receive a provisory expression with
this formula : the musician is now becoming a stage-
player, his art is developing more and more into a
talent for lying. I shall have an opportunity (in a
chapter of my principal work, which bears the title,
" A Physiology of Art ") of showing in detail how
this total transformation of art into stage -playing is
just as definite an expression of physiological degene
ration (more exactly, a form of hysterics) as any of
the corruptions and weaknesses of the art inaugurated
by Wagner ; for example, the restlessness of its
optics, which necessitates continual changing of
posture before it. One understands nothing of Wagner
so long as one only sees in him a sport of nature, a
caprice, a whim, or an accident. He was no " defec
tive, " " abortive, " or " contradictory, " genius as has oc
casionally been said. Wagner was something complete,
a typical decadent, in whom all " free will " was lacking,
all whose characteristics were determined by necessity.
If anything is interesting in Wagner, it is the logic
with which a physiological trouble, as practice and
procedure, as innovation in principles and crisis in



THE CASE OF WAGNER 25

taste, advances step by step, from conclusion to con
clusion.

I confine myself this time solely to the question
of style. What is the characteristic of all literary
decadencel It is that the life no longer resides in
the whole. The word gets the upper hand and jumps
out of the sentence, the sentence stretches too far and
obscures the meaning of the page, the page acquires
life at the expense of the whole the whole is no
longer a whole. But that is the simile for every style
of decadence : always anarchy of the atoms, disgre-
gation of will, in the language of morality, " liberty
of the individual," widened to a political theory,
" equal rights for all. " Life, equal vitality, vibration
and exuberance of life pushed back into the most
minute structures, the others poor in life. Everywhere
paralysis, distress, and torpor, or hostility and chaos,
always becoming more striking, as one ascends to
ever higher forms of organisation. The whole has
ceased to live altogether ; it is composite, summed
up, artificial, an unnatural product.

There is hallucination at the commencement in
Wagner not of tones, but of gestures ; for these
he seeks the appropriate semeiotic tones. If you
want to admire him, see him at work here : how he
separates, how he arrives at little unities, how he
animates them, inflates them, and renders them visible.
But by so doing his power exhausts itself : the rest



26 THE CASE OF WAGNER

is worth nothing. How pitiable, how confused, how
laic is his mode of " developing, " his attempt to pierce
at least into one another, things which have not grown
out of one another ! His manner here reminds one of
the Frcrcs dc G on court, whose style approaches
Wagner s in other respects also. A sort of pity is
aroused for so much trouble. That Wagner has
masked under the guise of a principle his incapacity
for creating organically, that he asserts a " dramatic
style " where we assert merely his incapacity for any
style, corresponds to an audacious habit which has
accompanied Wagner all his life : he posits a principle
where he lacks a faculty (very different in this respect,
let us say in passing, from old Kant, who loved
another kind of audacity : whenever he lacked a prin
ciple, he posited a " faculty " in human beings . . .).
Once more let it be said that Wagner is only worthy
of admiration and love in the invention of mimittce,
in the elaboration of details ; here we have every
right to proclaim him as a master of the first rank,
as our greatest miniaturist in music, who compresses
into the smallest space an infinitude of meaning and
sweetness. His wealth of colours, of demi-tints, of the
mysteries of vanishing light, spoils us to such a
degree that almost all other musicians seem too robust
afterwards. If you will believe me, the highest con
ception of Wagner is not to be got from what
at present pleases in his works. That has been in-



THE CASE OF WAGNER 27

vented to persuade the masses ; one of our class bounds
back in presence of it, as before an all too impudent
fresco. What do we care for the agacante brutality
of the Overture of Tannhauser ? or for the Circus
of the Walkyrie ? Whatever has become popular in
Wagner s music apart from the theatre is of a doubtful
flavour and spoils the taste. The Tannhauser March
seems to me to raise a suspicion of Philistinism ; the
Overture of the Plying Dutchman is much ado about
nothing ; the Prelude to Lohengrin gave the first ex
ample, only too insidious, only too successful, of how
one may hypnotise with music (I dislike all music that
has no higher ambition than to persuade the nerves).
Apart, however, from Wagner the magnetiser and
fresco -painter, there is yet a Wagner who deposits
little jewels in his works, our greatest melancholist in
music, full of flashes, delicacies, and words of comfort
in which no one has anticipated him, the master of
the tones of a melancholy and comatose happiness . . .
A lexicon of the most familiar language of Wagner,
nothing but short phrases of from five to fifteen
measures, nothing but music which nobody knows . . .
Wagner had the virtue of the decadents, pity . . .



" Very good ! But how can one lose one s taste
for this decadent, if one is not perchance a musician,



28 THE CASE OF WAGNER

if one is not perchance a decadent one s self ? " Re
versely ! How is it we can t do it ? Just attempt it !
You are not aware who Wagner is ; he is quite a
great stage-player ! Does there at all exist a more
profound, a more oppressive effect in the theatre ? Do
look at these youths benumbed, pale, and breathless !
They are Wagnerians, they understand nothing of
music and nevertheless Wagner becomes master over
them . . . Wagner s art presses with the weight of
a hundred atmospheres : bow yourselves just, it is
unavoidable . . . Wagner the stage-player is a tyrant,
his pathos overthrows every kind of taste, every
kind of resistance. Who has such convincing power
of attitude, who sees the attitude so definitely be
fore everything- else ? This holding the breath of
Wagnerian pathos, this unwillingness to let an ex
treme feeling escape, this dread-inspiring duration of
conditions where momentary suspense is enough to
choke one !

Was Wagner a musician at all ? At least he was
something else in a higJier degree, namely, an in
comparable liistrio, the greatest mime, the most
astonishing threatrical genius that the Germans have
had, our scenic artist par excellence. His place is
elsewhere than in the history of music, with the grand
true geniuses of winch he must not be confounded.
Wagner and Beethoven that is a blasphemy and
in the end an injustice even to Wagner . . . He was



THE CASE OF WAGNER 2 9

also as a musician only that which he \vas in other
respects : he became a musician, he became a poet,
because the tyrant in him, his stage -player genius
compelled him to it. One finds out nothing about
Wagner as long as one has not found out his domi
nating instinct.

Wagner was not a musician by instinct. He proved
this himself by abandoning all lawfulness, and to
speak more definitely all style in music, in order
to make out of it what he required, a theatrical rhe
toric, a means for expression, for strengthening atti
tudes, for suggestion, for the psychologically pictur
esque. Wagner might here pass for an inventor
and an innovator of the first rank he has immea
surably increased tJie speaking power of music ; he
is the Victor Hugo of music as language. Pro
vided always one grants that music may, under cer
tain conditions, not be music, but speech, tool, or
ancilla dramaturgica. Wagner s music, not taken

%

under protection by theatrical taste, a very tolerant
taste, is simply bad music, perhaps the worst that
has ever been made. When a musician can no longer
count three, he becomes " dramatic, " he becomes
" Wagnerian "...

Wagner has almost discovered what magic can be
wrought with a music decomposed and reduced, as it
were, to the elementary. His consciousness of it goes
so far as to be disquieting, like his instinct for finding



30 THE CASE OF WAGNER

a higher lawfulness and a style unnecessary. The elemen
tary suffices sound, movement, colour, in short, the
sensuality of music. Wagner never calculates as a
musician from any kind of musical conscience ; he
wants effect, he wants nothing but effect. And he
knows that on which he has to operate ! He has, in
this respect, the unscrupulousness which Schiller pos
sessed, which every one possesses who is connected with
the stage ; he has also Schiller s contempt for the w r orld,
which has to sit at his feet. A person is a stage-
player in virtue of having a certain discernment in
advance of other men, viz., that what has to operate
as true must not be true at all. The proposition has
been formulated by Talma : it contains the entire
psychology of the stage-player, it contains let us
not doubt it his morality also. Wagner s music is
never true.

But it is taken as true, and so it is all right.
As long as people continue childish, and Wagnerian
in addition, they think of Wagner even as rich, as a
paragon of lavishness, as a great landed proprietor in
the empire of sound. They admire in him what young
French people admire in Victor Hugo, the " royal
generosity. " Later on people admire both of them for
the very reverse reasons : as masters and models of
economy, as prudent amphitryons. Nobody equals
them in the ability to present an apparently princely
table at a modest cost. The Wagnerian, with his



THE CASE OF WAGXER 3 I

devout stomach, becomes satiated even with the fare
which his master conjures up for him. We others,
however, who, alike in books and in music, want sub
stance more than anything" else, and for whom merely
" represented " feasts hardly suffice, we are much worse
off. Speaking plainly, Wagner does not give us
enough to chew. His rccitatwo little meat, some
what more bone, and very much sauce has been
christened by me "Alia genovese ;" wherewith I cer
tainly do not mean to flatter the Genoese, but rather
the older recitative, the recitative secco. As for the
Wagnerian " leading motive, " I lack all culinary in
telligence for it. If I were pressed, I would perhaps
assign to it the value of an ideal toothpick, as an
occasion for dispensing with the rest of the food.
The "arias" of Wagner are still left. And now I do
not say a word more.



In sketching dramatic action, likewise, Wagner
is above all a stage-player. That which first suggests
itself to him is a scene with an absolutely sure effect,
a veritable actio *, with a haut-retief of gesture, a scene



* Note. It has been a veritable misfortune for ^Esthetics that
the word drama has always been translated by " action. " \Vagner is
not the only one who errs here ; all the world is still in error about
the matter ; even the philologists, who ought to know better. The
ancient drama had grand pathetic scenes in view, it just excluded
action (relegated it previous to the commencement, or behind the scene).



32 THE CASE OF WAGNER

which iipsets ; he thinks this out thoroughly, it is
only out of this that he derives his characters. All
the rest follows therefrom in accordance with a tech
nical economy which has no reasons to be subtle.
It is not the public of Corneille Wagner has to
indulge ; it is merely the nineteenth century. Wagner
would decide with regard to the " one thing needful "
in much the same manner as every other stage-player
decides now-a-days : a series of strong scenes, each
stronger than the other, and much sage stupidity
in between. He seeks first of all to guarantee to him
self the effect of his work ; he begins with the third
act, he tests for himself his work by its final effect.
With such a theatrical talent for guide, one is in no
danger of creating a drama unawares. A drama
requires hard logic : but what did Wagner ever care
about logic ! Let us repeat : it was not the public
of Corneille he had to indulge, it was mere Ger
mans ! One knows the technical problem in solving
which the dramatist applies all his power and often
sweats blood : to give necessity to the plot, and like
wise to the denouement, so that both are possible only
in one way, so that both give the impression of free
dom (principle of the least expenditure of force). Now

The word " drama " is of Doric origin, and according to Dorian usage
signifies "event, " "history, " both words in a hieratic sense. The oldest
drama represented local legend, the " sacred history " on which the
establishment of the cult rested (consequently no doing, but a happening:
in Dorian does not at all signify " to do ").



THE CASE OF WAGNER 33

Wagner sweats the least blood here ; it is certain that
he makes the least expenditure of force on plot and
denouement. You may put any one of Wagner s
" plots " under the microscope ; I promise you will
have to laugh at \vhat you see. Nothing more en
livening than the plot of Tristan, unless it be that of
the Master -singers. Wagner is not a dramatist ; let
us not be imposed upon ! He loved the word " drama ; "
that was all he always loved fancy \vords. The
word " drama, " in his writings, is nevertheless purely
a misunderstanding (and shrewd policy : Wagner al
ways affected superiority toward the word " opera "),
much in the same manner as the word " spirit " in the
New Testament is purely a misunderstanding. From
the first, he was not enough of a psychologist for the
drama ; he avoided instinctively psychological motiva
tion. By what means ? By always putting idiosyn
crasy in its place . . . Very modern, is it not ? very
Parisian ! very decadent / . . . The plots, let us say in
passing, which Wagner really knows how to work
out by means of dramatic invention, are of quite an
other kind. I give an example. Let us take the case
of Wagner requiring a woman s voice. An entire act
without a woman s voice that does not do ! But
for the moment none of the " heroines " are free. What
does Wagner do ! He emancipates the oldest woman
in the world, Erda. " Up ! old grandmother ! You have
got to sing ! " Erda sings. Wagner s purpose is served.

3



34 THE CASE OF WAGNER

He immediately discharges the old dame again. " Why
really did you come ? Retire ! Please go to sleep
again ! " In summa : a scene full of mythological
horrors, which makes the Wagnerians imaginative . . .
" But the contents of the Wagnerian texts ! their
mythical contents, their eternal contents ! " Question :
How does one test these contents, these eternal con
tents ! The chemist gives the reply : one translates
Wagner into the real, into the modern let us be
still more cruel, into civil life ! What then becomes
of Wagner ! To speak in confidence, I have attempted
it. Nothing more entertaining, nothing more recom-
mendable for pleasure walks, than to recount Wagner
to one s self in more modern proportions : for example,
Parsifal as a candidate in divinity, with a public
school education (the latter indispensable for pure folly*}.
What surprises one then experiences ! Would you
believe it that the Wagnerian heroines, each and all,
when one has only stripped them of their heroic trap
pings, are like counterparts of Madame Bovary !
And how one comprehends, inversely, that Flaubert
was at liberty to translate his heroine into Scandi
navian, or Carthaginian, and then to offer her, mytho-
logised, to Wagner as a libretto. Yes, taken as a
whole, Wagner appears to have had no interest in any
other problems than those which at present interest



* Nietzsche here refers to the etymology of Parsifal (pure fool)
which Wagner adopted.



THE CASE OF WAGNER 35

petty Parisian decadents. Always just five steps from
the hospital ! Nothing but quite modern problems,
nothing but problems of a great city ! don t you doubt
it ! ... Have you remarked (it belongs to this associa
tion of ideas) that the Wagnerian heroines have no
children ? They cannot have children . . . The despair
with which Wagner has dealt with the problem of
permitting Siegfried to be born at all, reveals how
modern his sentiments were on this point. Siegfried
" emancipates woman " but without hope of posterity.
Finally, a fact which perplexes us : Parsifal is the
father of Lohengrin ! How has he done that ? Have
we here to recollect that " chastity works miracles ? " . . .
Wagnerus dixit princeps in castitate auctoritas.



10

A word yet, in passing, concerning Wagner s
writings : they are among other things, a school of
expediency. The system of procedure which Wagner
uses, is to be employed in a hundred other cases, he
that hath an ear, let him hear. Perhaps I shall have
a claim to public gratitude, if I give precise expression
to his three most valuable principles of procedure :

Whatever Wagner cannot accomplish is objection
able.

Wagner might accomplish much more, but he is
unwilling owing to strictness of principle.

3*



36 THE CASE OF WAGXER

Whatever Wagner can accomplish, no one will
imitate, no one has anticipated, no one ought to imi
tate . . . Wagner is divine . . .

These three propositions are the quintessence of
Wagner s writings : the rest is " literature. "

Not all the music up till now has had need of
literature : one does well here to seek for a satisfactory
reason. Is it that Wagner s music is too difficult to
understand ? Or did he fear the contrary, that it
would be understood too easily, that it would not be
difficult enough to understand ? In fact, he has all
his life repeated one phrase : that his music does not
simply mean music ! But more ! Infinitely more ! . . .
"Not simply music "no musician speaks in such a
manner ! Let it be said once more, Wagner was un
able to cut out of the block ; he had no choice at all,
he was obliged to make patch- work " motives," atti
tudes, formulae, reduplications, centuplications ; as a
musician he remained a rhetorician : on that account
he was compelled as a matter of principle to bring the
device, " It implies, " into the foreground. " Music is
always just a means ; " that was his theory, that w^as
the only praxis at all possible for him. But no musician
thinks in such a way. Wagner had need of litera
ture in order to persuade all the world to take his
music seriously, to take it as profound, "because it
meant Infinity ; " all his life he was the commentator
of the " Idea. " What does Elsa signify ? There is



THE CASE OF WAGNER 37

no doubt however : Elsa is " the unconscious spirit of
the people" ("with this idea I necessarily developed
into a complete revolutionist "*).

Let us recollect that Wagner was young when
Hegel and Schelling led men s minds astray ; that he
found out, that he grasped firmly what only a German
takes seriously " the Idea," that is to say, something
obscure, uncertain, mysterious ; that among Germans
clearness is an objection, and logic is disproof.
Schopenhauer has, with severity, accused the epoch
of Hegel and Schelling of dishonesty with severity,
and also with injustice : he himself, the old pessimistic
false-coiner, has in no way acted " more honestly " than
his more celebrated contemporaries. Let us leave
morality out of the game : Hegel is a flavour . . . And
hot only a German, but a European flavour ! A
flavour which Wagner understood ! which he felt
himself equal to ! which he has immortalised ! He
merely made application of it to music he invented
for himself a style which " meant Infinity " he be
came the heir of Hcgcl . . . Music as " Idea "-

And how Wagner was understood ! The same sort
of men who were enthusiastic for Hegel, are at pre
sent enthusiastic for Wagner : in his school Hegelian
is even written / Above all, the German youth
understood him. The two words, " infinite " and " signi-



* Quotations from Wagner.



38 THE CASE OF WAGNER

ficance " quite sufficed ; he enjoyed an incomparable
pleasure in hearing them. It is not with music that
Wagner has won the youth over to himself, it is with
the " Idea : " it is the mysteriousness of his art, its game
of hide-and-seek among a hundred symbols, its poly-
chromy of the ideal, which has led and allured these
youths to Wagner ! it is Wagner s genius for forming
clouds, his gripping, sweeping and roving through the
air, his ubiquity and nullibiety precisely the same
proceedings with w^hich once Hegel misled and
seduced the youths ! In the midst of Wagner s
multiplicity, fulness, and arbitrariness, they are justified,
as it were, in their o\vn eyes they are " saved."-
They hear with trembling how in his art the sublime
symbols become audible with gentle thunder out of the
cloudy distance ; they are not out of temper if the
atmosphere here sometimes becomes grey, frightful,
and cold. For they are each and all related to
bad weather, German w r eather, like Wagner himself!
Woden is their God : Woden, however, is the God
of bad w r eather . . . They are right, these German
youths, such as they are : how could they miss in
Wagner what w r e others, we Halcyonians, miss in
him : la gay a scienza ; light feet ; wit, fire, grace,
lofty logic ; the dance of the stars, haughty intellect
uality ; the tremor of southern light ; the smooth sea
perfection . . .



THE CASE OF WAGNER 39

I I

I have explained where Wagner belongs to
not to the history of music. Nevertheless, what is
his import for the history of music ? The advent of
the stage-player in music : a momentous event, which
gives occasion to reflect, perhaps also to fear. In a for
mula, "Wagner and Liszt." Never has the upright
ness of musicians, their " genuineness," been put to
such a dangerous test. It is easily enough understood :
great success, the success with the masses, is no longer
on the side of genuineness, one has to be a stage-
player in order to obtain it ! Victor Hugo and Richard
Wagner they imply one and the same truth, that in
declining civilisations, wherever the arbitrating power
falls into the hands of the masses, genuineness becomes
superfluous, disadvantageous, and a drawback. It is only
the stage-player that still awakens great enthusiasm.
Thus dawns the golden age for the stage-player for him
and all that is related to his species. Wagner marches
with drums and fifes at the head of all the artists of
elocution, of display, of virtuosity ; he has first con
vinced the leaders of the orchestras, the machinists, and
theatrical singers. Not to forget the musicians of the
orchestra : he " saved " them from tedium . . . The
movement which Wagner created encroaches even on
the domain of knowledge ; entire sciences belonging
thereto emerge slowly out of a scholasticism which



4O THE CASE OF WAGNER

is centuries old. To give an example, I call special
attention to the service which Riemann has rendered
to rhythmics ; he is the first who has made current the
essential idea of punctuation in music (it is a pity that
by means of an ugly word he calls it " phrasing ").
All these, I say it with gratitude, are the best,
the most worthy of regard, eimong the worshippers
of Wagner they are simply right to worship
Wagner. The same instinct unites them with one
another, they see in him their highest type, they feel
themselves transformed and elevated to power, even
to great power, ever since he inflamed them with his
peculiar ardour. Here indeed, if anywhere, the in
fluence of Wagner has really been beneficent. In this
sphere, there has never been so much thought, so
much purpose, so much work. Wagner has inspired
all these artists with a new conscience : what they at
present require of themselves, what they obtain from
themselves, they have never required before Wagner s
time formerly they w^ere too modest for that. A
different spirit rules in the theatre since the spirit of
Wagner began to rule there : the most difficult is
demanded, there is severe blaming, there is rarely
praising, the good, the excellent, is regarded as the
rule. Taste is no longer necessary ; not even voice.
Wagner is only sung with a ruined voice : that has
a " dramatic " effect. Even talent is excluded. The
cspressivo at any price, such as is demanded by the



THE CASE OF WAGNER 4!

Wagnerian ideal, the decadence ideal, gets along badly
with talent. Virtue only is the proper thing here that is
to say, drilling, automatism, " self-denial." Neither taste,
nor voice, nor talent : there is only one thing needful
for Wagner s stage Germanics / . . . Definition of
Germanics : obedience and long legs ... It is full of
deep significance that the advent of Wagner coincides
with the advent of the " Empire ; " both facts furnish
proof of one and the same thing obedience and
long legs. There has never been better obedience ;
there has never been better commanding. The Wag
nerian musical directors, in particular, are worthy of
an age which posterity will one day designate with
timorous reverence, the classical age of war. Wagner
understood how to command ; by that means he was
the great teacher also. He commanded as the inex
orable will to himself, as the life-long discipline of
himself : Wagner, who perhaps furnishes the most
striking example of self-tyranny which the history of
art supplies (even Alfieri, otherwise most nearly
related to him, has been surpassed. Remark of a
Turinese).

12

By means of this insight that our stage -players
are more worthy of adoration than ever, their danger-
ousness has not been conceived as less . . . But
who yet doubts what I am after what are the



42 THE CASE OF WAGNER

three demands for which my resentment, my solici
tude, and my love for art, have at present opened
my mouth ?

That the theatre may not become the master of art.
That the stage-player may not become the corrupter

of the gemiine ones.
That mnsic may not become an art of lying.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



POSTSCRIPT

The gravity of the last words permits me in this
place to communicate in addition some passages from
an imprinted dissertation, which at least leave no
doubt concerning my seriousness in this matter. The
dissertation is entitled, What Wagner costs us.

The adherence to Wagner costs dear. An obscure
consciousness of this still exists at present. Even
Wagner s success, his triumph, did not outroot this
feeling radically. But formerly it was strong, it was
formidable, it was like a gloomy hatred throughout
almost three fourths of Wagner s life -time. That
resistance which he encountered among us Germans,
cannot be estimated highly enough, nor sufficiently
honoured. We defended ourselves against him as
against a disease not with arguments one does
not refute a disease, but with obstruction, with
mistrust, with aversion, with loathing, with a sullen
seriousness, as if a great danger prowled around us



44 THE CASE OF WAGNER

in him. The aesthetic gentlemen compromised them
selves, when, out of three schools of German philo
sophy they made an absurd attack upon Wagner s
principles with "if" and " for "-what did he care
for principles, even his own ! The Germans, however,
have had enough of reason in their instincts to pro
hibit themselves every "if" and "for" in this matter.
An instinct is weakened when it is rationalised; for
by rationalising itself it weakens itself. If there are
indications that, in spite of the totality of European
decadence, there yet resides in the German character
a degree of healthfulness, an instinctive scent for what
is injurious and threatens danger, I should like least
of all to see this stolid resistance to Wagner under
valued among us. It does honour to us, it permits
us even to hope : P"rance could no longer dis
pense with so much healthfulness. The Germans, the
rctarders par excellence in history, are at present
the most backward among, the civilised peoples of
Europe : this has its advantage, they are thus re
latively the youngest.

The adherence to Wagner costs dear. The Ger
mans have only quite lately unlearned a sort of
dread of him the desire to get rid of him came upon
them on every occasion*. Do you recollect a curious



* NOTE. "Was Wagner German at all ? We have some
reasons for asking this. It is difficult to discover in him any German
trait whatsoever. Being a great learner, he has learned to imitate



POSTSCRIPT 45

occurrence, in which, just at the end, that old feeling
again, quite unexpectedly, made its appearance ? It
happened at the funeral of Wagner that the first
Wagner Society in Germany, that of Munich, depo
sited on his tomb a wreath, the inscription on which
immediately became celebrated. " Salvation to the
Saviour ! "-was how it read. Everybody admired the
sublime inspiration which had dictated this inscription,
everybody admired a taste in which the partisans of
Wagner have a privilege ; but many also (it was
singular enough !) made the same little correction in
the inscription : " Salvation from the Saviour ! "
People recovered breath.

The adherence to Wagner costs dear. Let us
measure it in its effect upon civilisation. Whom has his
movement really brought into the foreground ? What
has it more and more reared into magnitude ?
More than anything else, the arrogance of the layman,
of the idiotic art-amateur. He organises societies just



much that is German that is all. His character itself is in oppo
sition to what has hitherto been regarded as German not to speak
of the German musician ! His father was a stage-player named
Geyer. A Geyer is almost an Adler* . . . What has hitherto been
put in circulation as the " Life of Wagner " is fable convemte, if not
worse. I confess my distrust of every point which rests solely on the
testimony of Wagner himself. He had not pride enough for any truth
whatsoever about himself, nobody was less proud ; he remained, just
like Victor Hugo, true to himself even in biographical matters, he
remained a stage player.

* Geyer (vulture) and Adler (eagle) are both names of Jewish families.



46 THE CASE OF WAGXER

now, he wants to make his "taste" prevail, he would
like even to become the judge in rebus musicis et
musicantibus. In the second place, an ever greater
indifference to all severe, noble, conscientious training
in the service of art ; the belief in genius substituted
for it ; in plain words, insolent dilettanteism (the for
mula for it is to be found in the Master-singers]. In
the third place, and worst of all, Theatrocracy ;
the absurdity of a belief in a precedence of the
theatre, in the right of sovercignity of the theatre over
the arts, over art . . . But one has to tell the Wagne-
rians a hundred times to their face what the theatre
is : always just something in subterposition to art,
always something merely secondary, something vul
garised, something suitably adapted for the masses,
suitably falsified for them. Even Wagner has changed
nothing of that : Bayreuth is big opera but never
good opera . . . The theatre is a form of demolatry in
matters of taste, the theatre is an insurrection of the
masses, a plebiscite against good taste. The case of
Wagner just proves this : he gained the multitude,
he depraved the taste, he depraved even our taste
for the opera !

The adherence to Wagner costs dear. What does
it make of the mind ? Does Wagner free the mind ?-
He is possessed of every ambiguity, every equi
vocation, everything, in fact, which persuades the
undecided, without making them conscious what they



POSTSCRIPT 47

are persuaded to. Wagner is thereby a seducer in
the grand style. There is nothing fatigued, nothing
decrepit, nothing dangerous to life and derogatory to
the world in spiritual matters, which would not be
secretly taken under protection by his art, it is
the blackest obscurantism which he conceals in the
luminous husks of the ideal. He flatters every nihil
istic (Buddhistic) instinct and disguises it in music, he
flatters every kind of Christianity, and every religious
form of expression of decadence. Let us open our
ears : everything that has grown up on the soil
of impoverished life, the entire false coinage of
transcendence and another world, has in Wagner s art
its sublimest advocate not in formulae (Wagner is
too prudent to use formulae), but in persuasion of
sensuality, which, in its turn, again makes the mind
tender and fatigued. Music as Circe ... His last
w^ork is in this respect his greatest masterpiece. Parsifal
will always maintain the chief place in the art of
seduction, as its stroke of genius ... I admire that
work, I should like to have composed it myself; not
having done so, / at least understand it . . . Wagner
was never better inspired than at the end. The ex-
quisiteness in the alliance of beauty and disease is
here carried so far that it casts, as it were, a shadow
over Wagner s earlier art : it appears too bright, too
healthy. Do you understand that ? Health and bright
ness acting as a shadow ? as an objection almost ? . . .



48 THE CASE OF WAGNER

We are so far pure fools already . . . Never was
there a greater connoisseur of musty, hieratic perfumes,
there never lived such an expert in the knowledge
of all the little infinite, of all the tremulous and ex
uberant, of all the femininism in the thesaurus of hap
piness ! Just drink, my friends, the philtres of this
art ! You nowhere find a more pleasant mode of
enervating your mind, of forgetting your manliness
under a rose-bush . . . Ah ! this old magician ! This
Klingsor of all the Klingsors ! How he makes war
against us therewith ! against us, the free spirits ! How
he humours every cowardice of modern soul with
Siren tones ! There was never such a mortal hatred
of knowledge ! One here requires to be a Cynic
to escape being seduced ; one requires to be able
to bite to avoid worshipping. Well ! old seducer ! The
Cynic warns thee cave canem . . .

The adherence to Wagner costs dear. I observe the
youths who have long been exposed to his infection.
The proximate effect, relatively innocent, relates to
taste. Wagner s influence is like a continuous use of
alcohol. It dulls, it obstructs the stomach with phlegm.
Specific effect : degeneracy of the sense of rhythm.
TheWagnerian at last comes to call rhythmical, what
I myself, borrowing a Greek proverb, call " agitating
the swamp." The corruption of the conceptions is
undoubtedly much more dangerous. The youth be
comes a moon -calf an " idealist." He has got



POSTSCRIPT



49



beyond science, in that respect he stands at the height
of the master. On the other hand, he plays the phi
losopher ; he writes Bayreuth journals ; he solves all
problems in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Master. The most disquieting thing, to be sure,
is the ruin of the nerves. You may go at night
through any of the larger cities, and everywhere you
hear instruments violated with solemn fury a savage
howling mingling therewith. What is taking place ?-
the youths are worshipping Wagner . . . Bayreuth
rhymes itself with hydropathic - establishment. A
typical telegram from Bayreuth : Bereits bereut (rued
already). Wagner is bad for youths ; he is fatal to
women. What, in medical language, is a Wagnerienne ?
It seems to me that a physician could not put this
conscience - alternative with too much seriousness to
brides : either the one or the other. But they have
already made their choice. One cannot serve two
masters if one of them is called Wagner. Wagner
has saved woman, therefore woman has built Bayreuth
for him. Entire sacrifice, entire devotion, they have
nothing they would not give him. Woman impoverishes
herself in favour of the master, she becomes touching,
she stands naked before him. The Wagnerienne the
most gracious equivocalness to be found at present :
she embodies Wagner s cause in her sign, his cause
triumphs . . . Ah, this old robber ! He plunders us
of our youths, he takes even our women as plunder,

4



50 THE CASE OF WAGNER

and drags them into his cavern . . . Ah, this old Mino
taur ! What he has already cost us ! Every year trains
of the finest maidens and youths are led into his laby
rinth, that he may devour them, every year all Europe
strikes up the cry : " Off to Crete ! Off to Crete ! "



SECOND POSTSCRIPT

My letter, it appears, is liable to a misapprehension.
On certain countenances the indications of gratitude
show themselves ; I hear even a discreet mirth. I should
prefer here, as in many things, to be understood.
But since a new animal ravages in the vineyards of
German intellect, the Empire worm, celebrated Rhino-
xera, nothing I say is any longer understood. The
Kreuzzeitung itself attests this to me, not to speak of
the Literarisches Centralblatt. I have given to the
Germans the profoundest books they at all possess
a sufficient reason why they should not understand
a word of them ... If in this work I make an attack
on Wagner and incidentally on a German " taste, "
if I have hard words for the Bayreuth cretinism,
I should like least of all to make an entertainment
therewith for any other musicians. Other musicians
do not come into consideration in presence of Wagner.
Things are bad everywhere. The decay is universal.

4*



52 THE CASE OF WAGNER

The disease is deep seated. If Wagner s name typi
fies the ruin of music, as Bernini s name typifies the
ruin of sculpture, he is not by any means its cause.
He has only accelerated its tempo, to be sure, in
such a way that one stands frightened before the
almost instantaneous descent, downwards, into the
abysm. He had the naivete of decadence : that was
his superiority. He believed in it, he did not stop
before any logic of decadence. The others hesitate
that distinguishes them. Nothing else ! . . . That which
Wagner and the " others " have in common I enume
rate it : the decline of organising power ; the abuse
of traditional means without the justifying capacity,
that of attaining the end ; the false coinage in the imi
tation of great forms, for which at present nobody is
sufficiently strong, sufficiently proud, sufficiently self-
confident, or sufficiently healthy ; the overliveliness of
the smallest details ; emotion at any price ; refinement as
the expression of impoverished life ; always more nerves
in place of flesh. I know only one musician who is at
present still in a position to cut an overture out of the
block, and nobody knows him* . . . What is at present
famous does not create "better" music in comparison
with Wagner s, but only music which is more inde
cisive, more indifferent : more indifferent, because the
incomplete is set aside by the presence of the com-



* It is Peter Gast, a disciple and friend of Nietzsche, who is here
referred to.



SECOND POSTSCRIPT 53

pletc. Wagner was complete ; but he was complete cor
ruption ; he was courage, he was will, he was convic
tion in corruption of what import, then, is Johannes
Brahms ! . . . His good fortune was a German mis
apprehension : he was taken for Wagner s antagonist,
an antagonist to Wagner \vas needed ! That does
not produce indispensable music, it produces in the first
instance too much music ! If you are not rich, be proud
enough for poverty ! . . . The sympathy which Brahms
here and there undeniably inspires, apart altogether
from such party interest and party misunderstanding,
was for a long time an enigma to me, until finally,
almost by accident, I came to perceive that he operated
on a certain type of persons. He has the melancholy
of impotency ; he does not create out of plenitude, he
is thirsty for plenitude. If one deducts his imitations,
what he borrows either from the great ancient or the
exotic modern forms of style he is a master in the
art of copying, there remains, as his most striking
peculiarity, the longing mood . . . That is divined by
all who long, by all who are dissatisfied. He is too
little of a person, too little centralised . . . That is what
the "impersonal," the peripheristic understand, they
love him on that account. He is especially the musi
cian of a class of unsatisfied ladies. Fifty paces
further on we find the Wagnerienne just as we
find Wagner fifty paces further on than Brahms,
the Wagnerienne, a better stamped, more interesting,



54 THE CASE OF WAGNER

and, above all, a more gracious type. Brahms is
moving, as long as he is in secret reveries, or
mourns over himself in that he is " modern ; " he
becomes cold, he is of no more interest to us, imme
diately that he becomes the heir of the classics . . .
One likes to speak of Brahms as the heir of Beethoven :
I know of no more considerate euphemism. All that
at present makes pretensions to the " grand style " in
music is thereby eitJier false with respect to us, or
false with respect to itself. This alternative is suffi
ciently thought-worthy, for it involves a casuistry with
regard to the worth of the two cases. " False with
respect to us : " the instinct of most people protests
against that they do not want to be deceived ; though
I myself, to be sure, should still prefer this type to the
other ("false with respect to itself"}. This is my taste.
Expressed more simply for the " poor in spirit : "
Brahms or Wagner . . . Brahms is no stage-player.
One may subsume a good many of the other
musicians under the conception of Brahms. I do not
say a word of the sagacious apes of Wagner, for
example, of Goldmark : with his Queen of Shcba one
belongs to the menagerie one may exhibit one s self.
What can be done well at present, what can
be done in a masterly manner, is only the small
things. It is here only that honesty is still possible.
Nothing, however, can cure music in the main
thing, of the main thing, of the fatality of being the



SECOND POSTSCRIPT 55

expression of a physiological contradiction, of being
modern. The best instruction, the most conscientious
schooling, the most thorough intimacy with the old
masters, yea, even isolation in their society all that
is only palliative, or, speaking more strictly, illusory ;
because one has no longer the physical capacity which
is presupposed : be it that of the strong race of a
Handel, be it the overflowing animality of a Rossini.
Not everyone has the right to every teacher : that
is true of whole epochs. The possibility is not in
itself excluded that there still exist, somewhere in
Europe, remains of stronger races, men typically in
opportune : from thence a delayed beauty and perfection
even for music might still be hoped for. It is only
exceptions we can still experience under the best
circumstances. From the rule that corruption is pre
valent, that corruption is fatalistic, no God can save
music.



EPILOGUE

Let us finally, in order to take breath, withdraw
for a moment from the narrow world to which all
questions concerning the worth of persons condemn
the mind. A philosopher requires to wash his hands
after he has so long occupied himself with the
" case of Wagner. " I give my conception of the
Modern. Every age has in its quantum of energy,
a quantum determining what virtues are permitted to
it, what virtues are proscribed. It has either the vir
tues of ascending life, and then it resists to the utter
most the virtues of descending life ; or it is itself
an epoch of descending life, and then it requires the
virtues of decline, then it hates all that justifies itself
solely by plenitude, by superabundance of strength.
^Esthetics is indissolubly bound up with these biological
presuppositions : there is decadence aesthetics, and
there is classical aesthetics, the " beautiful in it
self " is a chimera, like all idealism. In the narrower



EPILOGUE 57

sphere of so-called moral values there is no greater
contrast than that of master morality and morality
according to Christian valuation : the latter grown
up on a thoroughly morbid soil (the Gospels present
to us precisely the same physiological types which
the romances of Dostoiewsky depict) ; master morality
("Roman," "heathen," "classical," "Renaissance") re
versely, as the symbolic language of well-constitutedness
of ascending life, of the will to power as the principle
of life. Master morality affirms, just as instinctively
as Christian morality denies (" God," "the other world,"
"self-renunciation" nothing but negations). The former
communicates to things out of its fulness it glorifies,
it embellishes, it rationalises the world, the latter im
poverishes, blanches, and mars the value of things, it
denies the world. "The world," a Christian term of
insult. These antithetical forms in the optics of values
are both indispensable : they are modes of seeing
which one does not reach with reasons and refutations.
One does not refute Christianity, one does not refute
a disease of the eye. To have combated pessimism
as one combats a philosophy was the acme of learned
idiocy. The concepts " true " and " untrue " have not,
as it seems to me, any meaning in optics. That
against which alone one has to defend one s self is the
falsity, the instinctive duplicity, which will not be sen
sible of these antitheses as antitheses : as was the case
with Wagner, for example, who possessed no little



58 THE CASE OF WAGNER

masterliness in such falsities. To look enviously towards
master morality, noble morality (the Icelandic legend is
almost its most important document), and at the same
time to have in his mouth the contrary doctrine, the
" Gospel of the Lowly, " the need of salvation ! ... In
passing, let me say that I admire the modesty of the
Christians who go to Bayreuth. I myself should not
endure certain words out of the mouth of Wagner.
There are conceptions which do not belong to Bay
reuth . . . What ? A Christianity adjusted for Wag-
neriennes, perhaps by Wagneriennes (for Wagner in his
old days was positively feminini generis) ? Let me say
once more that the Christians of today are too modest
for me ... If Wagner was a Christian, then Liszt w r as
perhaps a Church-Father !* The need of salvation,
the essence of all Christian needs, has nothing to do
with such harlequins ; it is the sincerest form of ex
pression of decadence, the most convinced and most
painful affirmation of it in sublime symbols and prac
tices. The Christian wishes to get loose from himself.
Le moi est toujours Jiaissable. Noble morality, master
morality, has, reversely, its roots in a triumphing
^^/"-affirmation, it is the self -affirming, the self-
glorifying of life ; it equally needs sublime symbols
and practices, but only " because its heart is too full. "
All beautiful art, all great art belongs here : the essence
of both is gratitude. On the other hand, one cannot

* Liszt was Wagner s father-in-law.



EPILOGUE 59

discount from it an instinctive aversion from the deca
dents, a disdain, a horror even, before their symbolism :
such is almost its demonstration. The noble Roman
recognised Christianity as a fee da superstitio ; I here
remind you how Goethe, the last German of noble
taste, felt with regard to the cross. One seeks in vain
for more valuable, for more indispensable contrasts.*
But such a falsity as that of the Bayreuthians is now
no exception. We all know the unaesthetic conception
of the Christian " gentleman. " Indeed that innocence in
the midst of contradictions, that " good conscience " in
lying, is modern par excellence ; one almost defines
modernism by it. Modern man represents biologically
a contradiction of moral values, he sits between two
chairs, he says in one breath, Yea and Nay. What
wonder, then, that just in our time, falsity itself became
flesh and even genius ? what wonder that Wagner
" dwelt among us ? " It was not without reason that
I named Wagner the Cagliostro of modernism . . . But
we all, unconsciously and involuntarily, have in our
selves standards, phrases, formulae, and moralities of



* Note. My " Genealogy of Morals " furnished the first in
formation concerning the contrast between "noble morality" and "Chris
tian morality ; " there is perhaps no more decisive modification of thought
in the history of religious and moral knowledge. That book, my touch
stone for what belongs to me, has the good fortune to be accessible
only to the most elevated and the most rigorous minds : others have
not got ears for it. One has to have one s passion in things, where
nobody has it at present



60 THE CASE OF WAGXER

contradictory origin, regarded physiologically, we are
spurious ... A diagnostic of modern soul what
would it commence with ? With a resolute incision
into this contradictoriness of instincts, with the disent
angling of its antithetical moral values, with a
vivisection performed on its most instructive case.
The case of Wagner is a fortunate case for the
philosopher this work, one hears, is inspired by
gratitude . . .



NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER:
THE BRIEF OF A PSYCHOLOGIST



PREFACE

The following chapters are all rather carefully select
ed out of my older writings some of them go back
to 1877, they are perhaps simplified here and there,
above all, they are shortened. When read in succession,
they will leave no doubt concerning either Richard
Wagner or myself: we are antipodes. Something further
will also be understood : for example, that this is an
essay for psychologists, but not for Germans ... I
have my readers everywhere, in Vienna, in St. Peters
burg, in Copenhagen and Stockholm, in Paris, in
New -York I have not them in Europe s Flatland,
Germany . . . And I might perhaps also have a word
to whisper in the ear of Messrs, the Italians, whom
I love just as much as I ... Quousque tandem,
Crispi . . . Triple alliance : with the " Empire " an
intelligent people will never make aught but a mes
alliance . . .

Turin, Christmas-tide 1888.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



WHERE I ADMIRE

I believe artists often do not know what they
can do best : they are too conceited for that. Their
attention is directed to something prouder than those
little plants give promise of, which know how to
grow up in actual perfection, new, rare, and beauti
ful, on their soil. The final excellency of their own
garden and vineyard is superficially estimated by
them, and their love and their insight are not of
equal quality. There is a musician, who, more than
any other, has the genius for finding the tones pecu
liar to suffering, oppressed, tortured souls, and even
for giving speech to dumb misery. No one equals
him in the colours of the late autumn, the indescri
bably pathetic happiness of a last, alder-last, alder-
shortest enjoyment ; he knows a sound for those
secretly haunted midnights of the soul when cause
and effect seem to have gone out of joint and
every instant something can originate out of nothing.
He draws his resources best of all out of the lowest
depth of human happiness, and as it were out of its



66 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

drained goblet, where the bitterest and most nauseous
drops have at the end the good or the bad end-
met with the sweetest. He knows that weary self-
impelling of the soul which can no longer leap or fly,
yea, not even \valk ; he has the shy glance of pain
that is concealed, of understanding without comfort, of
leave-taking without confession ; yea, as the Orpheus
of all secret misery, he is greater than anyone, and
much has been added to art through him only, much
which was hitherto inexpressible and even seemingly
unworthy of art the cynical revolts, for example, of
which only the greatest sufferers are capable, and
likewise many quite small and microscopic matters
belonging to the soul, as it were the scales of its
amphibious nature, yes, he is the master of minutiae.
But he does not wisli to be so ! His character loves
rather the large walls and the audacious wall-pain
ting . . . He fails to observe that his spirit has a
different taste and inclination antithetical optics, and
likes best of all to sit quietly in the corners of broken
down houses : concealed there, concealed from himself,
he paints his proper master-pieces, which are all very
short, often only one measure in length, it is not till
there that he becomes quite good, great, and perfect,
perhaps there only. Wagner is one who has suffered
sorely that is his pre-eminence over the other musi
cians. I admire Wagner in everything in which he
sets himself to music.



67



WHERE I MAKE OBJECTIONS

That is not to say that I regard this music as
healthy, and there least of all where it speaks of
Wagner. My objections to Wagner s music are physio
logical objections : for what purpose is to be served
by disguising the same under aesthetic formulae ?
^Esthetics is certainly nothing but applied Physiology.
My "matter of fact," my " petit fait vrai," is that
I no longer breathe easily when once this music
operates on me, that my foot immediately becomes
angry at it and revolts : my foot has need of measure,
dance, march even the young German Kaiser cannot
march according to Wagner s Kaiser-march, my foot
desires first of all from music the raptures which lie
in good walking, stepping, and dancing. But does not
my stomach also protest ? my heart ? my circulation ?
do not my bowels fret ? Do I not unawares become
hoarse thereby ... In order to listen to Wagner I
need pastilles Ge raudel . . . And so I ask myself, what
is it at all that my whole body specially wants from
music ? For there is no soul ... I believe it wants
L s alleviation : as if all the animal functions were to be
accelerated by light, bold, wanton, self-assured rhythms ;
as if iron, leaden life were to lose its heaviness by
golden, tender, unctuous melodies. My melancholy
wants to take its repose in the hiding-places and





-tw^ / /Ar^yA AI



f /fff f.:-C



68 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGXER

abysses of perfection : for that purpose I need music.
But Wagner makes people morbid. Of what account
is the theatre to me ? The convulsions of its " moral "
ecstasies in which the mob and who is not " mob ! "
has its satisfaction ? The whole pantomime hocus-
pocus of the stage-player ? It is obvious that I am
essentially antitheatrically constituted : I have, from the
bottom of my soul, for the theatre this art of the
masses par excellence- that profound scorn which
at present every artist has. Success in the theatre a
person thereby sinks in my estimation, till he is never
again seen ; non-success then I prick up my ears and
begin to esteem . . . But Wagner was the reverse
(besides the Wagner who had made the lonesomest of
all music), essentially a theatre man and stage-player,
perhaps the most enthusiastic mimomaniac that has
existed, even as a musician . . . And in passing, we
would say that if it has been Wagner s theory, " the
drama is the end, music is always but the means, "
his praxis, on the contrary, from the beginning to the
close, has been, " the attitude is the end, the drama, as
well as music, is always only the mea.ns. " Music as
a means for elucidating, strengthening, and internalising
the dramatic pantomime and stage-player concreteness ;
and the Wagnerian drama only an occasion for many
interesting attitudes ! He possessed, along with all the
other instincts, the commanding instincts of a great
stage-player in all and everything : and, as we have



WAGXER AS A DAXGER 69

said, also as a musician. I once made this clear, not
without trouble, to a Wagnerian pur sang, clearness
and Wagnerians ! I do not say a word more. There
was reason for adding further " Be but a little more
honest with yourself ! for we are not in Bayreuth. In
Bayreuth people are only honest in the mass, as in
dividuals they lie, they deceive themselves. They leave
themselves at home when they go to Bayreuth, they
renounce the right to their own tongue and choice, to
their taste, even to their courage, as they have it and
use it within their own four walls with respect to
God and the world. Nobody takes the most refined
sentiments of his art into the theatre with him, least
of all the artist who works for the theatre, solitude
is wanting, the perfect does not tolerate witnesses. In

the theatre one becomes mob, herd, woman, Pharisee,
I

voting animal, patron, idiot Wagnerian : there even

the most personal conscience succumbs to the levelling
charm of the great multitude, there the neighbour
rules, there one becomes neighbour . . ."

/* W/Vr^&lt;^&gt; (,4p*&gt; )

WAGNER AS A DANGER



The object which recent music pursues in what is
at present called by a strong though obscure name
" infinite melody " one can explain to one s self by going



70 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

into the sea, gradually losing secure footing on the
bottom, and finally submitting one s self to the element
at discretion : one has to swim. In older music, in an
elegant, or solemn, or passionate to-and-fro, faster and
slower, one had to do something quite different, namely,
to dance. The proportion necessary thereto, the ob
servance of definite balance in measures of time and
intensity, extorted from the soul of the hearer a conti
nuous consideration, on the contrast between this
cooler breeze, which originated from consideration,
and the breath of enthusiasm warmed through, the
charm of all good music rested. Richard Wagner
wanted another kind of movement he overthrew the
physiological pre-requisite of previous music. Swimming,
hovering no longer walking, dancing . . . Perhaps
the decisive word is thereby said. " Infinite melody "
just seeks to break up all symmetry of measure and
intensity, at times it derides it even it has its wealth
of invention precisely in what sounded to the ears of
former times as rhythmical paradox and abuse. Out
of an imitation, out of a predominance of such a taste,
there might arise such a danger to music that a greater
could not even be imagined the complete degeneration
of rythmical feeling, chaos in place of rhythm . . . The
danger reaches its climax when such a music rests
always more and more upon entirely naturalistic stage-
playing and pantomime, which, subject to no law of
plastic art, desire effect and nothing more . . . The



A MUSIC WITHOUT A FUTURE



espressivo at any price, and music in the service, in
the slavery of attitude that is the end . . .



What ? would it really be the first virtue of a per
formance (as the performing 1 musical artists at present
seem to believe), to attain under all circumstances a
hautrelief which cannot be surpassed ? Is not this,
when applied, for example, to Mozart, the special sin
against the spirit of Mozart, the gay, enthusiastic,
tender, amorous spirit of Mozart, who, fortunately, was
not German, and whose seriousness is a gracious, golden
seriousness, and not that of a German Philistine . . .
Not to mention the seriousness of the "marble statue" . . .
But you think that all music is music of the " marble
statue," that all music must spring forth out of the
wall and agitate the hearer to his very bowels ....
It is only thus that music is said to operate ! Who
is there operated upon? Something on which a noble
artist must never operate, the masses! the immature!
the used up ! the morbid ! the idiots ! the Wagnerians / ...



A MUSIC WITHOUT A FUTURE

Music, of all the arts that know how to grow
up on the soil of a certain civilisation, makes its



72 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

appearance last of the plants, perhaps because it is the
most intrinsic, and consequently arrives latest in the
autumn and withering of each civilisation. It was only
in the art of the Dutch masters that the soul of the
Christian Middle Ages found its dying echo, their
tone-architecture is the posthumous, though genuine
and equally legitimate sister of Gothic. It was only
in Handel s music that the best re-echoed out of the
soul of Luther and his kin : the heroic Jewish trait,
wilich gave the Reformation a touch of greatness,
the Old Testament become music, not the New Testa
ment. It was reserved for Mozart to pay in clinking
gold pieces the balance due to the age of Louis XIV
and the art of Racine and Claude Lorrain ; it was only
in Beethoven s and Rossini s music that the eighteenth
century sang itself out, the century of enthusiasm, of"
broken ideals, and ^fugitive happiness. All true, all
original music is a swan s song. Perhaps even our
latest music, notwithstanding its predominance and
ambition, has but a brief space of time before it ; for
it originated out of a civilisat-in" -./nose basis is rapidly
*i~ VlV , -a iurtnwith sunken civilisation. A certain
Catholicism of sentiment, and a delight in some ancient
indigenous (so-called " national ") existence, or nuisance,
are its pre-requisites. Wagner s appropriation of old
legends and songs in which learned prejudice had
taught us to see something Germanic par excellence
we laugh at that now, and the new inspiration of



WE ANTIPODES 73

these Scandinavian monsters with a thirst for ecstatic
sensuality and supersensuality : all this taking" and
giving of Wagner in respect to materials, characters,
passions, and nerves, would also express plainly the
spirit of Wagner s music, provided that this itself, like
all music, should not know how to speak unambiguously
of itself: for music is a woman,,. We must not allow
ourselves to be misled with regard to this state of
affairs by the fact that for the moment we are living
precisely in the reaction within the reaction. The age
of national wars, of ultramontane martyrdom, this
whole interlude-character which the circumstances of
Europe at present are possessed of, may, in fact,
assist such art as that of Wagner in obtaining a sudden
glory, without thereby guaranteeing" to it a future.
The Germans themselves have no future . . .



WE ANTIPODES

It will be remembered perhaps, at least among my
friends, that at the commencement I rushed upon this
modern world with some errors and overestimates,
and in any case as a hopeful person. I understood
who knows from what personal experiences ? the philo
sophical pessimism of the nineteenth century as the
symptom of a higher thinking power, of a more trium
phal fulness of life than had found expression in the



74 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

philosophy of Hume, Kant, and Hegel, I took tragical
perception for the choicest luxury of our civilisation,
as its most precious, most noble, most dangerous mode
of squandering, but always, on the ground of its super
abundance, as its permitted luxury. I similarly inter
preted Wagner s music in my own way, as the expres
sion of a Dionysian powerfulness of soul, I believed
that I heard in it the earthquake with which a primitive
force of life, suppressed for ages, finally relieves itself,
indifferent as to whether all that at present calls itself
civilisation is shaken thereby. It is obvious what I
misunderstood, it is obvious in like manner what I
bestowed icpon Wagner and Schopenhauer myself . . .
Every art, every philosophy may be regarded as a
medicine and helping expedient of adv^Incing or
decaying life : they always presuppose suffering and
sufferers. But there are two kinds of sufferers : on
the one hand those suffering from the superabundance
of life, who want a Dionysian art and similarly a
tragic insight and prospect with regard to life, and
on the other hand those suffering from the impoverish
ment of life, who desire repose, stillness, smooth
sea, or else ecstasy, convulsion, intoxication furnished
by art and philosophy. The revenge on life itself
the most voluptuous kind of ecstasy for such impover
ished ones ! . . . To the double requirement of the latter
Wagner just like Schopenhauer corresponds they both
deny life, they calumniate it ; they are thereby my



WE ANTIPODES 75

antipodes. The richest in fulness of life, the Dionysian
God and man, may not only allow himself the spectacle
of the frightful and the questionable, but even the
frightful deed, and every luxury of destruction, de
composition and denial, with him the evil, the sense
less, and the loathsome appear as it were permitted,
as they appear to be permitted in nature as a con
sequence of the superabundance of the procreative,
restorative powers which out of every desert is still
able to create a luxuriant orchard. On the other hand
those suffering most, the poorest in life, would have
most need of gentleness, peaceableness and bene
volence that which at present is called humanity
in thinking as well as in practice : if possible, a
God who is quite specially a God for the sick, a
" Heiland ; similarly also logic, the understand-
ableness of existence as a conception, even for idiots
the typical " freethinkers, " like the " idealists, " and
" beautiful souls, " are all decadents ; in short, a certain
warm, fear-excluding narrowness and inclusion in opti
mistic horizons which permit stupefaction ... In this
manner I gradually learned to understand Epicurus,
the antithesis of a Dionysian Greek ; in like manner the
Christian, who, in fact, is only a species of Epicurean
who, with the doctrine, " belief makes blessed, " carries
out the principle of Hedonism as far as possible till
he is beyond all intellectual righteousness ... If I have
something in advance of all psychologists, it is that



76 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

my insight is sharper for that nicest and most insidious
species of inference a posteriori in which most errors
are made : the inference from the work to its originator,
from the deed to the doer, from the ideal to him who
needs it, from every mode of thinking and valuing
to the ruling requirement behind it. In respect to
artists of every kind, I now make use of this main
distinction : has the hatred of life, or the superabundance
of life become creative here ? In Goethe, for example,
the superabundance became creative, in Flaubert the
hatred : Flaubert, a new edition of Pascal, but as an
artist with instinctive judgment at bottom : "Flaubert
est toujours liaissablc, I lwmme n est rien, I ceuvre est
tout". . . He tortured himself when he composed,
quite as Pascal tortured himself when he thought
they both felt " unegotistic. " " Unselfishness " the
de cadence-^rmc\^\Q, the will to the end in art as well
as in morals.



WHERE WAG^R

Even at the present time France is still the seat of
the most intellectual and refined civilisation of Europe,
and the high school of taste : but one must know
how to find this " France of taste. " The Norddeutsche
Zcitung, for example, or he who has it for his
mouthpiece, sees in the French, "barbarians," as for
me, I seek for the black part of earth, where " the

, . r if

fa h(. A (} AT-



WHERE WAGXER BELONGS TO 77

slaves " ought to be freed, in the neighbourhood
of the Norddeutsche . . . He who belongs to that
France keeps himself well concealed : there may be
a small number in whom it is embodied and lives, be
sides perhaps men who do not stand upon the strongest
legs, in part fatalistic, melancholy, sick, in part over-
pampered, over-refined, such as have the ambition
to be artificial but they have in their possession all
the elevation and delicacy that is still left in the
world. In this France of intellect, which is also the
France of pessimism, Schopenhauer is at present more
at home than he ever has been in Germany ; his principal
work twice translated already, the second time admir
ably, so that I now prefer to read Schopenhauer in
French (he was an accident among Germans, as I am
an accident the Germans have no fingers for us, they
have no fingers at all, they have only claws). Not to
speak of Heinrich Heine I adorable Heine they say
in Paris who has long ago passed over into the flesh
and blood of the profounder and more soul-breathing
lyric poets of France. What would German horned
cattle know how to deal with the delicatesses of such
a nature ! Finally, as regards Richard Wagner : one
would seize it with hands, not perhaps with fists,
that Paris is the proper soil for Wagner : the more
French music shapes itself according to the needs of
the " dme moderne," the more it becomes Wagnerian,
it already does so sufficiently. One must not allow



NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER



one s self to be misled here by Wagner himself it was
sheer wickedness of Wagner to mock at Paris in its
agony in 1871 ... In Germany Wagner is never
theless a mere misunderstanding : who would be more
incapable of understanding anything of Wagner than
the young Kaiser, for example ? The fact remains
certain, nevertheless, for everyone who is acquainted
with the movement of European civilisation, that French
Romanticism and Richard Wagner are very closely
connected. Altogether dominated by literature up to
their eyes and ears the first artists of Europe possessing
a universal literary culture, mostly even themselves
writers, poets, intermediaries and blenders of the senses
and arts, altogether fanatics of expression, great dis
coverers in the domain of the sublime, also of the
loathsome and the shocking, still greater discoverers
in effect, in display, in the art of the shop window,
altogether talented far beyond their geniuses, virtuosi
through and through with dismal accesses to every
thing which seduces, allures, forces, or upsets, born
enemies of logic and the straight line, covetous of
the foreign, the exotic, the monstrous, and all opiates
of the senses and understanding. On the w r hole,
a rashly-venturing, magnificently-violent, high-flying,
and high up-pulling kind of artists, who had first
to teach to their century it is the century of the
mass the conception of "artist." But sick . . .



79



WAGNER AS THE APOSTLE OF CHASTITY

i

Is this our mode ?

From German heart came this vexed ululating ?
From German body this self-lacerating ?
Is ours this priestly hand-dilation,
This incense-fuming excitation ?
Is ours this plunging, faltering, brangling,
This, sweet as sugar, ding-dong-dangling ?
This sly nun ogling, Ave-hour-bell tinkled,
This whole false rapturous flight beyond the heavens

star-sprinkled ? , . .

Is this our mode ?

Think well ! Ye still stay for ingression , . .
For what ye hear is Rome, Rome s faith without

expression.



Chastity and sensuality are not necessarily anti
thetical; every true marriage, every genuine love-affair
is beyond any such antithesis. But in those cases in
which this antithesis really exists, it fortunately needs
not at all to be a tragical antithesis. This might at
least be the case with all better constituted, more
cheerful mortals, who are not at all disposed, without
further ado, to reckon their fluctuating state of equi-



SO NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

librium betwixt angel and petite bete among the
arguments against existence, the finest, the brightest,
such as Hafiz and Goethe, have even discerned an
additional charm therein. It is just such contradictions
that allure to life . . . But if, on the other hand, the
ill-constituted beasts of Circe can be induced to wor
ship chastity, they will, as is but too plain, see and
worship in it only their own antithesis and oh, one
can imagine with how much tragic grunting and eager
ness ! that same painful and absolutely superfluous
antithesis which Richard Wagner at the end of his
days undoubtedly intended to set to music and pro
duce on the stage. For what purpose really f we
may reasonably ask.

3

Here, to be sure, that other question cannot be
avoided : what had Wagner really to do with that manly
(alas, so very unmanly) "rustic simplicity," the poor devil
and country lad, Parsifal, whom, by such insidious means,
he finally succeeded in making a Roman Catholic
what ? was this Parsifal really meant seriously f
For that people have laughed over him I would least
of all dispute, nor would Gottfried Keller do so ...
One might wish that the Wagnerian Parsifal had been
meant to be gay, like a finale or satiric drama, with
which, precisely in a due and worthy manner, the
tragedian Wagner had intended to take his farewell



WAGNER AS THE APOSTLE OF CHASTITY 8 I

of us, also of himself, and above all of tragedy, namely,
with an excess of the greatest and most wanton parody
on the tragical itself, on all the awful earth-earnestness
and earth-sorrowfulness of the past, on the stupidest
form of the antinaturalness of the ascetic ideal finally
surmounted. For Parsifal is an operetta theme par
excellence . . . Are we to understand Wagner s Parsifal
as his secret laugh of superiority at himself, as the
triumph of his greatest, finally attained artistic freedom
and artistic other-worldness Wagner, who knows how
to laugh at himself ? . . . As has been said, one might
wish that it were so : for what sense could we attach
to a Parsifal seriously meant ? Is it really necessary to
suppose (as I have been told) that Wagner s Parsifal
is " the product of a maddened hatred of perception,
intellect, and sensuality ? " an anathema on sense and
intellect in one breath, in a fit of hatred ? an apostasy
and return to sickly, Christian, and obscurantist ideals ?
And finally, worst of all, the self-negation and self-
annulment of an artist who had striven so far, with
all his will-power, for the opposite, namely, for the
highest spiritualising and sensualism g of his art ? And
not only of his art, but of his life as well. Let us
recollect how enthusiastically Wagner once walked
in the footsteps of Feuerbach the philosopher. Feuer-
bach s phrase of "a healthy sensuality," echoed in the
third and fourth decades of this century to Wagner as
to many other Germans they called themselves the



82 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

young Germans like the word of salvation. Did the
older Wagner unlearn his former creed ? Very likely
he did ! judging from the disposition he evinced toward
the end of his life to iinteach his first belief . . . Has
the hatred of life got the upper hand in him, as in
Flaubert ? . . . For Parsifal is a work of cunning,
of revengefulness, of secret poison-brewing, hostile to
the pre-requisites of life ; a bad work. The preaching
of chastity is an incitement to antinaturalness : I despise
everyone who does not regard Parsifal as an outrage
on morals.



HOW I GOT FREE FROM WAGNER

i

As far back as the summer of 1876, in the middle of
the period of the first festival plays, my heart had taken
farewell of Wagner. I cannot stand anything ambi
guous ; and since Wagner s return to Germany, he
had condescended step by step to everything that I
despise even to Anti-Semitism ... It was, in fact,
high time to take farewell then : soon enough I
got proof of that. Richard Wagner, apparently the
most triumphal, while in truth become a decayed,
despairing decadent, sank down suddenly, helpless and
disjointed, before the Christian cross . . . Was there no
German then with eyes in his head, or sympathy in



HOW I GOT FREE FROM WAGNER 83

his conscience, for this awe-inspiring spectacle ? Was
I the only one who siiffered from it ? Enough, to
myself the unexpected event, like a flash of lightning,
illuminated the position I had left, and also that subse
quent horror which every one feels who has passed
unconsciously through a fearful danger. When I went
further on alone, I shivered ; not long thereafter I was
sick, more than sick, namely, fatigued : fatigued by
the incessant undeceiving concerning all that yet re
mained for the inspiration of us modern men, concerning
the strength, labour, hope, youth, and love squandered
on all sides ; fatigued out of disgust for the whole ideal
istic falsity and softening of conscience, which here
once more had scored a victory over one of the bravest ;
fatigued, finally, and not least, by the grief of an unrelent
ing suspicion that I was henceforth condemned to
mistrust more profoundly, to despise more profoundly,
to be more profoundly alone, than ever before. For
I had had no one but Richard Wagner ... I was
condemned perpetually to the Germans . . .



Lonely, henceforth, and sadly mistrustful of myself,
I then, not without indignation, took sides against
myself, and for everything which gave pain to, and
was hard upon me ; I thus found the way again to
that brave pessimism which is the antithesis of all

6*



84 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

idealistic falsity, and also, as it would appear to me,
the way to myself, to my task . . . That concealed
and imperious something for which for a long time we
have had no name, until it finally proves itself to be
our task, this tyrant in us retaliates frightfully for
every attempt which we make to shirk it or escape
from it, for every premature decision, for every thinking
ourselves equal to those of whose number we are not,
for every activity, however honourable it may be, if
it happen to distract us from our main business nay
even, for every virtue which might shield us from the
sternness of our special responsibility. Sickness is
always the answer, when we are inclined to doubt con
cerning our right to our task, w r hen we begin to make
it easier for ourselves in any respect. Strange and
frightful at the same time ! It is our alleviations for
which we must do the severest penance ! And if we
want afterwards to return to health, there is no choice
for us : we must burden ourselves heavier than we
were ever burdened before .



THE PSYCHOLOGIST SPEAKS

i

The more a psychologist, a born, an unavoidable
psychologist and soul-diviner, turns his attention to the
more select cases and individuals, the greater becomes



THE PSYCHOLOGIST SPEAKS &gt;5

his danger of suffocation by sympathy. He needs
sternness and gaiety more than another man. For cor
ruption, the ruin of higher men, is the rule : it is
dreadful to have such a rule always before one s eyes.
The manifold tortures of the psychologist who has once
discovered this ruin, and has then in almost every
case throughout all history discovered this entire internal
" unblessedness " of higher man, this eternal " too-
late ! " in every sense -may perhaps one day become
the cause of his own ruin . . . One perceives, in almost
every psychologist, a tell-tale preference for intercourse
with common and well-ordered men, such as betrays
that he always requires curing, that he needs a
sort of flight and forgetfulness away from what his
insight, his incisions, his business have laid upon his
conscience. He is possessed by a fear of his memory.
He is easily silenced before the judgment of others,
he hears with unmoved countenance how others re
verence, admire, love, and glorify where he has per
ceived, or he even conceals his silence by expressing
his agreement with some superficial opinion. Perhaps
the paradox of his situation gets to be so horrible that
the " educated classes, " on their part, learn great re
verence precisely where he has learned great sympathy
and great contempt . . . And who knows if in all great
cases nothing more than this took place, -that a God
was worshipped, and the God was only a poor sacri
ficial animal . . . Success has always been the greatest



86 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

liar and the work, the deed is a success as well . . .
The great statesman, the conqueror, the discoverer,
are disguised in their creations, hidden away until they
are unrecognisable ; the work of the artist, of the
philosopher, only invents him who has created it, is
said to have created it ... The "great men," as they
are reverenced, are poor little fictions composed after
wards, in the world of historical values spurious coinage
is current .



Those great poets, for example, such as Byron,
Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol I do not ven
ture to name much greater names, but I think them
as they avowedly are and must be, men of the
moment, sensuous, absurd, five-fold, light-minded and
hasty in mistrust and in trust ; with souls in which
usually some flaw has to be concealed ; often taking
revenge by their works for an inner contamination, often
seeking forgetfulness with their upward flights from
a too-true memory, idealists out of the neighbourhood
of the swamp what torments these great artists are,
and the so-called higher men generally, for him who
has once found them out . . . We are all advocates of
the mediocre ... It is conceivable that it is just from
woman (who is clairvoyant in the world of suffering,
and alas, also, ready to help and save "to an extent
far beyond her po\vers) that they experience so easily



THE PSYCHOLOGIST SPEAKS 87

those outbreaks of unlimited sympathy, which the
multitude, above all the reverent multitude, overloads
with inquisitive and self-satisfying interpretations. This
sympathising deceives itself constantly as to its power :
woman would like to believe that love can do all,
it is a superstition peculiar to herself. Alas, he who
knows the heart finds out how poor, helpless, pre
tentious, and liable to error even the best, the deepest
love is how it rather destroys than saves . . .



3

The intellectual loathing and haughtiness of any
man who has suffered profoundly it almost deter
mines rank, how profoundly a person can suffer, the
chilling certainty, with which he is entirely imbued
and coloured, that in virtue of his suffering he knows
more than the shrewdest and wisest could know, that
he has been familiar with, and at home in many distant,
frightful worlds, of which "you know nothing" . . .
this tacit intellectual haughtiness, this pride of the elect
perception, of the "initiated," of the almost sacrificed,
deems all kinds of disguises necessary to protect itself
from contact with over-officious and sympathising hands,
and, in general, from all that is not its equal in
suffering. Profound suffering makes noble ; it separates.
One of the most refined forms of disguise is Epi
curism, and a certain ostentatious boldness of taste,



88 NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

which takes the suffering lightly, and puts itself
in defence against all that is sorrowful and profound.
There are " gay men " who make use of gaiety, be
cause, on account of it, they are misunderstood, they
wish to be misunderstood. There are " scientific minds, "
which make use of science, because it gives a gay
appearance and because the scientific spirit suggests
that a person is superficial they wish to mislead to a
false conclusion . . . There are free, insolent minds
which would fain conceal and deny that at the bottom
they are disjointed, incurable souls it is the case of
Hamlet : and then folly itself may be the mask for an
unhappy over-assured knowledge.



EPILOGUE



I have often asked myself if I am not under deeper
obligation to the hardest years of my life than to any
other. As my innermost nature tea.ches me, all that is
necessary, when viewed from an elevation and in the
sense of a great economy, is also the useful in itself,
one should not only bear it, one should love it ...
Amor fati: that is my innermost nature. And as
regards my long sickness, do I not owe to it un
utterably more than to my health ? I owe to it a
higher health, such a health as becomes stronger by
everything that does not kill it ! / owe to it also
my philosophy ... It is great affliction only that is
the ultimate emancipator of the mind, as the instruc
tor of strong suspicion which makes an X out of every
U, a true, correct X, that is, the penultimate letter
of the alphabet, before the last ... It is great
affliction only that long, slow affliction in which we
are burned as it were with green wood, which takes



QO NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER

time, that compels us philosophers to descend into
our ultimate depth and divest ourselves of all trust,
all good-nature, glossing, gentleness, and averageness,
where we have perhaps formerly installed our humanity.
I doubt whether such affliction " improves " us : but I
know that it deepens us ... Be it that we learn
to confront it with our pride, our scorn, our strength
of will, doing like the Indian who, however sorely
he may be tortured, takes revenge on his tormentor
by his bad tongue ; be it that we withdraw from
affliction into nothingness, into dumb, benumbed,
deaf self-surrender, self-forgetfulness, and self-extinc
tion ; from such long, dangerous exercises of self-
mastery one emerges as another man, with several
additional interrogation marks, above all, with the
will to question henceforward more, more profoundly,
more strictly, more sternly, more wickedly, more quietly
than has ever been questioned on earth before . . .
Confidence in life is gone ; life itself has become a
problem. May it never be believed that one has
thereby necessarily become a gloomy person, a moping
owl ! Even love to life is still possible, only one loves
differently ... It is the love to a woman that causes
us doubts .



The strangest thing is this : one has afterwards an
other taste, a second taste. Out of such abysses,



&gt;&gt; *. "&lt;&lt; &gt; -



EPILOGUE Q I

including the abyss of strong suspicion, one comes
back born again, with the skin cast, more ticklish,
more wicked, with a finer taste for pleasure, with a
more delicate tongue for all good things, with a merrier
disposition, with a second and more dangerous in
nocence in pleasure, more childish and also a hundred
times more refined than one had ever been before.

Oh, how repugnant to one henceforth is gratification,
coarse, dull, drab -coloured gratification, as usually
understood by those who enjoy life, our " educated "
class, our rich and ruling class ! How malignantly
we now listen to the great bum-bum of the fair with
which (by means of art, book, and music and with
the assistance of spirituous liquors) " educated " people
and city men at present allow themselves to be outrag
ed for the sake of " intellectual gratification ! " How
the theatre-cry of passion now pains our ear, how the
whole romantic tumult and sensuous hubbub which
the educated mob love (together with its aspirations
after the sublime, the elevated, the preposterous), has
become strange to our taste ! No, if we convalescents
still need an art, it is another art an ironical, easy,
fugitive, divinely untrammelled, divinely artificial art,
which, like a pure flame, blazes forth in an unclouded
heaven ! Above all, an art for artists, only for artists !
We afterwards understand better about what is first
of all necessary thereto : gaiety, all gaiety, my
friends ! . . . We know some things too well now,



92 NIETZSCHE COXTRA WAGNER

\ve knowing ones : oh, how we henceforth learn to
forget well, things well not to know, us artists ! . . .
And as regards our future : we will scarcely be found
again on the paths of those Egyptian youths who at
night make the temples unsafe, embrace statues, and
absolutely want to unveil, uncover, and put into clear
light everything which for good reasons is kept con
cealed. Xo, this bad taste, this will to truth, to "truth
at any price," this madness of youths in the love of
truth has become disagreeable to us : for it we are
too experienced, too serious, too jovial, too shrewd,
too profound . . . We no longer believe that truth
remains truth w r hen the veil is pulled off it, we have
lived long enough to believe this . . . At present it is
regarded as a matter of propriety not to be anxious
to see everything naked, to be present at everything,
to understand and " know " everything. Tout com-
prendre c est tout mcpriser ... " Is it true that
God is everywhere present ? " asked a little girl of
her mother. " That is indecent, I think " a hint to
philosophers ! . . . One ought to have more reverence
for the bash/illness with which nature has concealed
herself behind enigmas and variegated uncertainties.
Is truth perhaps a woman who has reasons for
not showing her reasons ? . . . Is her name perhaps,
to speak in Greek, Baubo f . . . Oh these Greeks !
they knew how to live \ For that end it is necessary,
to remain bravely at the surface, the fold, the skin,



EPILOGUE Q3

to worship appearance, to believe in forms, in tones,
in words, in the whole Olympus of appearance !
These Greeks were superficial out of profundity . . .
And do we not just come back thereto, we adventurers
of intellect, we who have climbed up the highest and
most dangerous peak of present thought and have
looked around us therefrom, we who have looked down
therefrom ? Are we not just therein Greeks ? Wor
shippers of forms, of tones, and of words ? and just
by virtue of that artists ? . . .



THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS;

OR

HOW TO PHILOSOPHISE WITH A
HAMMER



PREFACE

It requires no little skill to maintain one s cheer
fulness when engaged in a sullen and extremely re
sponsible business ; and yet, what is more necessary
than cheerfulness ? Nothing succeeds unless over
flowing spirits have a share in it. The excess of
power only is the proof of power. A Trans valuation
of all Values, that note of interrogation, so black, so
huge that it casts a shadow on him who sets it up,
such a doom of a task compels one every moment to
run into sunshine , to shake off a seriousness which
has become oppressive, far too oppressive. Every
expedient is justifiable for that purpose, every " case "
is a case of fortune, warfare more especially. War
fare has always been the grand policy of all minds
which have become too self-absorbed and too profound :
there is healing virtue even in being wounded. A
saying, the origin of which I withhold from learned
curiosity, has for a long time been my motto :
Increscunt animi, vires cit volnere virtus.



9 8 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

Another mode of recuperation, which under certain
circumstances is still more to my taste, is to auscultate
idols . . . There are more idols in the world than
realities ; that is my " evil eye " for this world, it is also
my " evil ear "... To put questions here for once with
a hammer, and perhaps to hear as answer that well-
known hollow sound which indicates inflation of the
bowels, what delight for one who has got ears behind
his ears, for me, an old psychologist and rat-catcher
in whose presence precisely that which would like
to remain unheard is obliged to become audible. . . .

This work also the title betrays it is above all
a recreation, a sun-freckle, a diversion into the idleness
of a psychologist. Is it also perhaps a new warfare ?
And new idols are auscultated, are they ? . . . This little
w r ork is a grand declaration of warfare : and as re
gards the auscultation of idols, it is no temporary idols,
but eternal idols which are here touched with a hammer
as with a tuning-fork, there are no older, more self-
convinced, or more inflated idols in existence . . . Neither
are there any hollo wer ones ... That does not prevent
them from being the most believed in. Besides people
never call them idols, least of all in the most eminent
case . . .

Turin, 3o th September 1888,

the day when the first book of the Transvaluatton of
all Values was finished.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE



APOPHTHEGMS AND DARTS

i

Idleness is the parent of all psychology. What !
is psychology then a vice ?

2

Even the boldest of us have but seldom the cour
age for what we really know.

3

To live alone, one must, be an animal or a God-
says Aristotle. The third case is wanting : one must
be both a philosopher.

4
Every truth is simple Is that not doubly a lie ?

5

Once for all, there is much I do not want to know.
Wisdom sets bounds even to knowledge.

6

We recover best from our unnaturalness, from our
spirituality, in our savage moods . . .



IOO THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

7

How is it ? Is man only a mistake of God ? Or
God only a mistake of man ?

8

From the military school of life. What does not
kill me, strengthens me.

9

Help thyself : then every one else helps thee.
Principle of brotherly love.

10

Would that we were guilty of no cowardice with
respect to our doings, would that we did not repudiate
them afterwards ! Remorse of conscience is indecent.

1 1

Is it possible for an ass to be tragic ? For a
person to sink under a burden which can neither be
carried nor thrown off ? . . . The case of the philo
sopher.

12

When one has one s wherefore of life, one gets
along with ;ilmost every how. Man does not strive
after happiness ; the Englishman only does so.

13

Man has created woman out of what do you
think ? Out of a rib of his God, his " ideal "...



APOPHTHEGMS AND DARTS IOI

14

What ? you are seeking ? you would like to dec
uple, to centuple yourself? you are seeking adherents?
Seek ciphers /

15

Posthumous men myself, for example, are worse
understood than opportune, but are better heard.
More strictly : we are never understood therefore our
authority . . .

16

Among women. "Truth ? Oh, you do not know
truth ! Is it not an outrage on all our pudeurs f"

17

That is an artist such as I love, modest in his
requirements : he really wants only two things, his
bread and his art, panem et Circen . . .

18

He who cannot put his will into things, puts at
least a meaning into them : that is, he believes there is
a will in them already. (Principle of " Belief.")

19

What ? you choose virtue and a full heart, and at
the same time gaze with envy at the advantages of
the unscrupulous ? With virtue, however, one renounces
" advantage "... (At the door of an Anti-Semite.)



IO2 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

20

The perfect woman perpetrates literature as she

perpetrates a little sin : by way of test, in passing

turning round to look if anybody notices it, and
in order that somebody may notice it ...

21

To get ourselves into such conditions only as
do not permit us to have feigned virtues ; in which,
rather, like the rope-dancer on his rope, we either fall,
or stand or escape in safety . . .

22

" Bad men have no songs." ; How is it that the
Russians have songs ?

23
" German esprit : " for eighteen years, a contradictio

in adjecto.

24

By seeking after the beginnings of things people
become crabs. The historian looks backwards ; he
finally believes backwards also.

25

Contentedness is a prophylactic even against catch
ing cold. Has a woman who knew she was well
dressed ever caught cold ? I put the case that she
was hardly dressed at all.

* Quotation from Seume s Die Gcsange. The correct form is
" Rascals have no songs, " but " bad men " has become the traditional
form of the saying.



APOPHTHEGMS AND DARTS IO3

26

I mistrust all systematisers, and avoid them. The
will to system is a lack of rectitude.

27

We think woman deep why ? because we never
find any bottom in her. Woman is not even shallow.

28

If a woman possesses manly virtues, she is to
be run away from ; and if she does not possess them,

she runs away herself.

29

" How much the conscience had to bite formerly !
what good teeth it had ! And to-day, what is wrong ? "

A dentist s question.

30

We seldom commit a single precipitancy. The first
time we always do too much. Just on that account
we are usually guilty of a second precipitancy and
then we do too little . . .

3i

The trodden worm turns itself. That is sagacious.
It thereby lessens the probability of being again
trodden on. In the language of morality : sub-

missiveness.

32

There is a hatred of lying and dissembling re
sulting from a sensitive notion of honour ; there is



IO4 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

also a similar hatred resulting from cowardice in as
much as lying is forbidden by a Divine command.
Too co\vardly to tell lies . . .

33

How little is required for happiness ! The sound of
a bag-pipe. Without music life would be a mistake.
The German conceives of God even as singing songs. *

34

On ne pcut penscr et ecrire qu assis (G. Flaubert).
There I have got you, nihilist ! Sedentary application
is the very sin against the Holy Ghost. Only thoughts
won by walking are valuable.

35

There are times when we psychologists become
restive like horses : we see our own shadows before
us bobbing up and down. The psychologist, to see
at all, has to abstract from himself.

36

Whether \ve immoralists do injury to virtue ?
Just as little as anarchists do to princes. It is only

* An allusion to a song by Arndt, Des Deiitschen Vaterland. In
the lines : g o we j|- die deutsche Zunge klingt

Und Gott im Himmel Lieder singt

Gott is of course dative ; but by a misunderstanding it is traditionally
regarded as nominative. Hence the conception of God singing songs
over Germany.



APOPHTHEGMS AND DARTS 1 05

since princes have been wounded by shots that they
sit firmly on their thrones again. Moral : We must
wound morality by our shots.

37

You run on ahead ? Do you do so as shepherd ?
or as an exception ? A third case would be that of
the deserter . . . First question of conscience.

38

Are you genuine ? or only a dissembler ? A re
presentative ? or the represented itself ? Finally, you
are merely an imitation of a dissembler. . . . Second
question of conscience.

39

The disillusioned speaks. I sought for great men ;
I never found aught but the apes of their ideal.

40

Are you one who looks on ? or one who goes to
work ? or one who looks away, and turns aside ? . . .
Third question of conscience.



Do you intend to go along with others ? or go on
ahead ? or go by yourself ? . . . One must know what
one intends, and that one intends something. Fourth
question of conscience.



106 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS



Those were steps for me, I have climbed up beyond
them, to do so, I had to pass them. But it was
thought I would make them my resting place . . .

43

Of what consequence is it that / am in the right !
I am too much in the right. And he who laughs best
to-day, will laugh also in the end.

44

Formula of my happiness : A Yea, a Nay, a
straight line, a goal . . .



THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES

i

The wisest men in all ages have judged similarly
with regard to life : it is good for nothing. Always
and everywhere we hear the same sound out of their
mouth a sound full of doubt, full of melancholy :
full of the fatigue of life, full of resistance to life.
Even Socrates said when he died, "To live that
means to be long sick : I owe a cock to Asclepios
the saviour." Even Socrates had enough of it. What
does that prove ? What does it indicate ? Formerly
it would have been said (it has been said indeed
and loud enough, and loudest of all by our pessi
mists !) "Here at all events, there must be some
thing true ! The consensus sapientium proves the
truth." Are we still to continue talking in such a
manner ? are we allowed to do so ? " Here at all
events there must be something diseased," is our
answer : those wisest men of all ages, we should look
at them close at hand ! Were they, perhaps all of



108 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

them, a little shaky on their legs ? latish ? tottering ?
decadents ? Does wisdom perhaps appear on earth
as a raven inspirited by a faint scent of carrion ? . . .



This irreverence, that the great wise men are
declining types, first suggested itself to my mind with
regard to a case where the strongest prejudices of
the learned and the unlearned stood opposed to it :
I recognised Socrates and Plato as symptoms of decline,
as agencies in Grecian dissolution, as pseudo-Grecian,
as anti-Grecian ("The Birth of Tragedy" 1872). That
consensus sapientium I understood it better and
better proves least of all that they were correct in
that on which they were in accordance : it proves
rather that the)- themselves, those wisest men, w-ere
somehow in accordance physiologically to take up a
position to have to take up a position unanimously
negative with regard to life. Judgments, valuations
with regard to life, for or against, can ultimately
never be true : they only possess value as symp
toms, they only come into consideration as symp
toms, in themselves such judgments are follies.
We must by all means stretch out the hand, and
attempt to grasp this surprising finesse, that the worth
of life cannot be estimated. It cannot be estimated
by a living being, because such a one is a party yea,



THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES IOQ

the very object in the dispute, and not a judge ; it
cannot be estimated by a dead person for a different
reason. For a philosopher to see a problem in the
worth of life, is really an objection to him, a mark
questioning* his wisdom, a folly. What ? and all these
great wise men they were not only decadents, they
were not even wise ? But I come back to the problem
of Socrates.

3

Socrates, according to his descent, belonged to the
lowest of the people ; Socrates was of the mob. One
knows, one still sees it one s self, how ugly he was.
But ugliness, while it is an objection in itself, is
almost a refutation when found among Greeks. Was
Socrates Greek at all ? Ugliness is often enough
the expression of a thwarted development checked by
cross breeding. Besides, it appears as deteriorating
development. The anthropologists who are crimino-
logists tell us that the typical criminal is ugly : mon-
struvi in f route, monstrum in ammo. But the criminal
is a decadent. Was Socrates a typical criminal ? At
least the famous verdict of a physiognomist, which
was so offensive to the friends of Socrates, would not
contradict that assumption. A foreigner who was a
judge of countenances, when he passed through Athens,
told Socrates to his face that he was a monst-mm he
concealed in himself all the worst vices and passions.
And Socrates merely answered, " You know me, sir."



I I O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

4

Not only does the confessed dissoluteness and
anarchy in his instincts point to decadence in Socrates,
but the superfoetation of logicality and that rJiacliiti-
cal malignity which distinguishes him points in the
same direction. Neither must we forget those auditory
hallucinations which have wrongly been interpreted in
a religious sense, as the " demon of Socrates." Every
thing is exaggerated in him, everything is buffo and
caricature ; at the same time everything is concealed,
reserved, and subterranean. I try to understand
out of what idiosyncrasy the Socratic equation of
reason - - virtue = : happiness originates : that most
bizarre of equations, which, in particular, has all the
instincts of the older Hellenes opposed to it.



5

With Socrates Greek taste veers round in fa
vour of dialectics. What really happens then ?
Above all superior taste is vanquished, the mob gets
the upper hand along with dialectics. Previous to
Socrates dialectic manners were repudiated in good
society : they were regarded as improper manners, they
compromised. The youths were warned against them.
Besides, all such modes of presenting reasons were
distrusted. Honest things, like honest men, do not



THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES I I I

carry their reasons in their hands in such fashion. It
is indecent to put forth all the five fingers. That
which requires to be proved is little worth. All the
world over, where authority still belongs to good
usage, where one does not " demonstrate " but com
mands, the dialectician is a sort of buffoon : he is
laughed at, he is not taken seriously. Socrates was
the buffoon who got himself taken serioiisly. What
really happened then ?



We choose dialectics only when w T e have no other
means. We know we excite mistrust with it, we
know it does not carry much conviction. Nothing is
easier wiped away than the effect of a dialectician :
that is proved by the experience of every assembly
where speeches are made. It can only be a last defence
in the hands of such as have no other weapon left.
It is necessary to have to extort one s rights ; other
wise one makes no use of dialectics. The Jews were
therefore dialecticians ; Reynard the Fox was a dialect
ician : what ? and Socrates also was one ?



7

Is the irony of Socrates an expression of revolt ?
of a moblike resentment ? Does he, as one of the
suppressed, enjoy his natural ferocity in the dagger-



I 1 2 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

thrusts of syllogism ? does he revenge himself on
the upper classes whom he fascinates ? As a dialect
ician a person has a merciless instrument in his hand :
he can play the tyrant with it ; he compromises when
he conquers. The dialectician leaves it to his opponent
to demonstrate that he is not an idiot ; he is made
furious, and at the same time helpless. The dialect
ician paralyses the intellect of his opponent. What ?
is dialectics only a form of revenge with Socrates ?



I have given to understand what could make
Socrates repellent ; there is now the more need to
explain the fact tJiat he fascinated. That he discovered
a new mode of agon, of which he became the first
fencing-master for the superior circles of Athens that
is one reason. He fascinated in that he appealed to
the agonal impulse of the Hellenes, he introduced a
variation into the wrestling matches among young men
and youths. Socrates was also a great erotic.



9

But Socrates found out somewhat more. He saw
behind the higher class of Athenians, he understood
that his case, the idiosyncrasy of his case, was no
longer exceptional. The same kind of degeneration



THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES I I 3

was preparing quietly everywhere : old Athens was
coming to an end. And Socrates understood that
all the world had need of him, of his method,
his cure, his special artifice for self-maintenance . . .
Everywhere the instincts were in anarchy ; everywhere
people were within an ace of excess : the monstrum
in animo was the universal danger. " The impulses
are about to play the tyrant, we must invent a counter-
tyrant stronger than they "... When the physio
gnomist had disclosed to Socrates who he was, a cave
of all evil passions, the great ironist uttered another
word which gives the key to him. " It is true," he
said, "but I became master over them all." How did
Socrates become master over himself ? His case was
after all only the extreme case, the most striking case
of that which then began to be the universal trouble
namely, that nobody was any longer master of him
self, that the instincts became mutually antagonistic.
He fascinated as such an extreme case, his fear-
inspiring ugliness proclaimed him as such to every
eye ; as a matter of course, he fascinated still more
as the answer, the solution, the seeming cure of this
case.

10

When it is necessary to make a tyrant out of
reason, as Socrates did, there must be considerable
danger of something else playing the tyrant. Ration-

8



I 1 4 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

ality was hit upon in those days as a Saviour, it was
not a matter of free choice for either Socrates or his
"valetudinarians" to be rational, it was de rigueur,
it was their last expedient. The fanaticism with which
the whole of Greek thought throws itself upon ration
ality betrays a desperate situation : they were in danger,
they had only one choice : they had either to go to
ruin, or be absurdly rational . . . The moralism of
Greek philosophers, from Plato downwards, is patho
logically conditioned ; their estimation of dialectics
likewise. Reason virtue = happiness means merely
that we have to imitate Socrates, and put a permanent
day-light in opposition to the obscure desires the day
light of reason. We have to be rational, clear, and
distinct, at any price : every yielding to the instincts,
to the unconscious, leads downwards . . .



1 1

I have given to understand by what means Socrates
fascinated : he seemed to be a physician, a Saviour.
Is it necessary to expose the error which was involved
in his belief in " rationality at any price ? " It is self-
deception on the part of philosophers and moralists to
think of rising above decadence by waging war with
it. Rising above it is beyond their power, what they
select as an expedient, as a deliverance, is itself
only an expression of decadence ; they alter its



THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES I 1 5

expression, they do not do away with itself. Socrates
was a misunderstanding, the whole of improving morality,
including Christian morality, has been a misunder
standing . . . The fiercest day-light, rationality at
any price, the life clear, cold, prudent, conscious,
without instincts, in opposition to instincts: this itself
was only an infirmity, another infirmity and, not at all
a way of return to " virtue," to " health," or to happiness.
To have to combat the instincts that is the formula
for decadence: as long as life ascends, happiness is
identical with instinct.



12

Has he himself conceived that, this wisest of all
self-dupers ? Did he say that to himself at the last
in the wisdom of his courage to meet death ? . . .
Socrates wanted to die : Athens did not give him
the poison cup ; he gave it to himself ; he compelled
Athens to give it to him . . . "Socrates is no phy
sician," he said softly to himself : " death is the only
physician here . . . Socrates himself was just a chronic
valetudinarian . , ."



"REASON" IN PHILOSOPHY

i

People ask me what is all idiosyncrasy in philo
sophers ? . . . For example, their lack of historical
sense, their hatred of the very idea of becoming, their
Egyptianism. They think they confer honour on a
thing when they isolate it from its historical relations,
sub specie aterni, when they make a mummy out
of it. For millenniums philosophers have been handling
conceptual mummies only : nothing real has come out
of their hands alive. They kill, they stuff, when they
adore, these gentlemen, the conceptual idolaters,
they become mortally dangerous to everything when
they adore. For them death, change, and age, just
as well as production and growth, are objections,
refutations even. What is, does not become ; what
becomes, is not ... Now they all believe in what
is, with desperation even. As, however, they do not
get hold of what is they seek for reasons why it is
withheld from them. " There must be a semblance,



" REASON IN PHILOSOPHY I 1 7

a deception there, which prevents us perceiving what
is : where is the deceiver concealed ? " " We have
found it," they cry joyfully, " it is sensuousness !
Those senses, which are also so immoral in other
respects, deceive us with regard to the true world.
Moral: to escape from the deception of the senses,
from becoming, from history, from falsehood, history
is nothing but belief in the senses, belief in falsehood.
Moral : denial of all that accords belief to the Senses,
of all the rest of mankind: that all is "mob." To
be a philosopher, to be a mummy, to represent
monotono-theism by a grave-diggers s mimicry ! And
above all, away with the body, that pitiable idee fixe
of the senses ! afflicted with all the fallacies of logic
in existence, refuted, impossible even, although it is
impudent enough to pose as actual." . . .



With high reverence I put the name of Heraclfais
apart from the others. If the mob of the other
philosophers rejected the testimony of the senses be
cause they exhibited plurality and alteration, he re
jected their testimony because they exhibited things
as if they possessed permanence and unity. Heraclitus
also did injustice to the senses. They neither deceive
in the way the Eleatics believed, nor as he believed,
they do not deceive at all. What we make



I 1 8 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

out of their testimony, that is what introduces false
hood ; for example, the falsehood of unity, the false
hoods of materiality, of substance, of permanence . . .
" Reason " is the cause why we falsify the testimony
of the senses. In as far as the senses exhibit becom
ing, dissolving, and transforming, they do not de
ceive . . . But Heraclitus will always be right in this
that being is an empty fiction. The " seeming "
world is the only one ; the " true world " has been
deceitfully invented merely . . .



3

And what fine instruments for observation we
possess in our senses ! This nose, for example, of
which as yet no philosopher has spoken with respect
and gratitude, is even (in the mean time at least)
the most delicate instrument at our disposal : it is able
to attest minimum differences of movement which
even the spectroscope cannot attest. At present, we
possess science exactly to the extent we have resolved
to accept the testimony of the senses, to the extent
we have learned to sharpen them, furnish them with
appliances, and follow them mentally to their limits.
The rest is abortion and not-yet-science : i. c. meta
physics, divinity, psychology, and theory of perception.
Or formal science, science of symbols ; as logic, and
that applied form of logic, mathematics. Actuality






" REASON " IN PHILOSOPHY I I Q

is nowhere mentioned in those sciences, not even as
a problem ; as little as the question, what value at
all such a symbolic convention as logic possesses.



4

The other idiosyncrasy of philosophers is not less
dangerous : it consists in confounding the last and the
first. The products which occur at the end alas ! for
they should not occur at all ! the " highest notions,"
that is, the most general, the emptiest notions, the
last fume of evaporating reality are placed by
them at the beginning, as the beginning. This,
again, is but the expression of their mode of doing
reverence : the higher must not grow out of the lower,
it must not be grown at all ... Moral : everything
of the first rank must be causa sui. The origin out
of something else is regarded as an objection, as a
sign of questionable value. All highest values are of
the first rank, none of the highest notions the notions
of what is, of the unconditioned, of the true, of
the perfect none of all these can have become ; each
must consequently be caiisa sui. But none of those
highest notions can be unequal either, they cannot
be in disagreement among themselves. They thereby
attain their stupendous conception of " God "... The
last, the thinnest, the emptiest is placed as the first,
as cause in itself, as ens realissimum . . . Alas, that



I2O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS



mankind have had to take seriously the delirium of
sick cobweb spinners ! And they have paid dearly
for it .



Let us finally state, in opposition thereto, how
differently we (I say courteously we) view the problem
of error and seemingness. Formerly, people regarded
alteration, mutation, and becoming) generally, as evidence
of seemingness, as indications that there could not but
be something there which led them astray. At present,
on the contrary, we see ourselves entangled in some
measure in error, necessitated to error precisely as
far as our rational prejudice compels us to posit unity,
identity, permanence, substance, cause, materiality, what
is ; however certain we are, by means of a strict recal
culation of the account, that the error is found there.
It is just the same here as with the motions of the sun.
There, our eyes are the agencies through which error
constantly operates, here it is our language. In its
origin, language belongs to the age of the most rudi
mentary form of psychology : we come into the midst
of a gross fetish system when we call up into con
sciousness the fundamental presuppositions of linguistic
metaphysics (i. e., the presuppositions of "reason"}.
This system sees everywhere actors and action ; it
believes in will as cause in general ; it believes in the



" REASON " IX PHILOSOPHY 121

" ego," in the ego as being, in the ego as substance ;
and it projects the belief in the ego-substance on to
everything it first creates thereby the conception
"thing" . . . Being is everywhere thought into, and
foisted ^lpon things, as cause ; it is only from the
conception " ego " that the derivative conception of being
follows ... At the commencement there is the great
bane of error, that will is something which acts
that will is a facility . . . We now know that it
is merely a word . . . Very much later, in a world
a thousand times better enlightened, the certainty, the
subjective assurance in handling the categories of
reason, came, all of a sudden, to the consciousness of
philosophers : they concluded that those categories
could not have their origin in experience for the
whole of experience, they said, was in opposition
to them. Conseqiiently, whence do they originate f
And in India, as in Greece, the same mistake has been
fallen into : " we must once have belonged to a higher
world (instead of one very much lower which would
have been the truth !), we must have been Divine, for
we possess reason ! " In fact, nothing has hitherto
had a more naive convincing power than the error of
being, as it w T as formulated, for example, by the
Eleatics ; for it has in its favour every word, every
sentence which we utter ! The opponents of the
Eleatics likewise yielded to the misleading influence
of their concept of being ; Democritus among others,



122 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

when he devised his atom ..." Reason " in language :
oh what a deceitful old female ! I fear we do not
get rid of God, because we still believe in grammar . . .



People will be thankful if I compress into four
theses such an essential and such a new insight. I
thereby make it more easily understood ; I thereby
challenge contradiction.

First Proposition. The grounds upon which " this "
world has been designated as seeming, rather establish
its reality, another kind of reality cannot possibly be
established.

Second Proposition. The characteristics which have
been assigned to the "true being" of things are the
characteristics of non- being, of nothingness ; the
" true world " has been built up out of the contra
diction to the actual world : a seeming world in fact,
in as far as it is merely an illusion of moral optics.

Third Proposition. To fable about " another " world
than this has no meaning at all, unless an instinct of
calumniation, disparagement, and aspersion of life is
powerful in us : if that be the case we take revenge
on life, with the phantasmagoria of " another, " a
"better" life.

Fourth Proposition. To separate existence into a
"true" and a "seeming" world, either in the manner



"REASON" IN PHILOSOPHY 123

of Christianity, or in the manner of Kant (who was a
wily Christian at last), is only a suggestion of decadence,
a symptom of deteriorating life . . . That the artist
values appearance more than reality is no objection
against this proposition. For here " appearance " means
reality once more, only select, strengthened, and cor
rected reality . . . The tragic artist is no pessimist,
he rather says yea, even to all that is questionable and
formidable ; he is Dionysian . . .



HOW THE " TRUE WORLD " FINALLY BECAME
A FABLE

HISTORY OF AN ERROR

1 The true world attainable by the wise, the pious,
and the virtuous man, he lives in it, he em
bodies it.

(Oldest form of the idea, relatively rational,
simple, and convincing. Transcription of the
proposition, "I, Plato, am the truth.")

2 The true world unattainable at present, but pro
mised to the \vise, the pious, and the virtuous
man (to the sinner \vho repents).

(Progress of the idea : it becomes more refined,
more insidious, more incomprehensible, it be
comes feminine, it becomes Christian.)

3 The true world unattainable, undemonstrable, and
unable to be promised ; but even as conceived,
a comfort, an obligation, and an imperative.



HOW THE "TRUE WORLD" FINALLY BECAME A FABLE 125

(The old sun still, but shining only through
mist and scepticism ; the idea become sublime,
pale, northerly, Kcenigsbergian.)

4 The true world unattainable ? At any rate un-
attained. And being unattained also unknown.
Consequently also neither comforting, saving, nor
obligatory : what obligation could anything un
known lay upon us ?

(Grey morning. First yawning of reason. Cock-
crowing of Positivism.)

5 The "true world" an idea neither good for any
thing, nor even obligatory any longer, an idea
become useless and superfluous ; consequently a
refuted idea : let us do away with it !

(Full day ; breakfast ; return of bon sens and
cheerfulness ; Plato blushing for shame ; infernal
noise of all free intellects.)

6 We ha,ve done away with the true world : what
world is left ? perhaps the seeming ? . . . But no !
in doing away with the true, we have also done
away with the seeming world !

(Noon ; the moment of the shortest shadow ;
end of the longest error ; climax of mankind ;
INCIPIT ZARATHUSTRA).



MORALITY AS ANTI-NATURALNESS



All passions have a time when they are fatal only,
when, with the weight of their folly, they drag their
victim down ; and they have a later, very much later
period, when they wed with spirit, when they are
" spiritualised." Formerly, people waged war against
passion itself, on account of the folly involved in it,
they conspired for its annihilation, all old morality
monsters are unanimous on this point : " il faut tuer
les passions." The most notable formula for that
view stands in the New Testament, in the Sermon on
the Mount, where, let us say in passing, things are
not at all regarded from an elevated point of mew.
For example, it is there said with application to sexual
ity, " if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out." Fortunately
no Christian acts according to this precept. To
annihilate passions and desires merely in order to
obviate their folly and its unpleasant results appears
to us at present simply as an acute form of folly.



MORALITY AS ANTI-NATURALNESS 127

We no longer admire the dentist who pulls out the
teeth, that they may no longer cause pain. It may be
acknowledged, on the other hand, with some reason
ableness that, on the soil out of which Christianity
has grown, the notion of a " spiritualisation of
passion could not at all be conceived. The primitive
Church, as is well known, battled against the " in
telligent " in favour of the " poor in spirit : " how
could we expect from it an intelligent \var against
passion ? The Church fights against passion w T ith
excision in every sense : its practice, its " cure " is
castration. It never asks, " How to spiritualise, beautify,
and deify a desire ? " it has, at all times, laid the
emphasis of discipline upon extermination (of sensuality,
of pride, of ambition, of avarice, of revenge). But to
attack the passions at the root means to attack life
itself at the root : the praxis of the Church is inimical
to life .



The same means, castration, extirpation, is instinc
tively chosen in the struggle with a desire by those
who are too weak of will and too degenerate to be
able to impose due moderation upon themselves ; those
natures, which, to speak with a simile (and without a
simile), need la Trappe, any definitive declaration of
hostility, a gap between themselves and a passion.
The radical means are indispensable only to the de-



128 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

generate : weakness of will, or to speak more definitely,
the incapability of not reacting in response to a
stimulus, is itself merely another form of degeneration.
Radical hostility, deadly hostility against sensuality
is always a critical symptom ; one is thereby justified
in making conjectures with regard to the general
condition of such an extremist. Moreover, that hostility,
that hatred, only reaches its height when such natures
no longer possess sufficient strength for a radical cure,
for abjuring their "devil." Survey the whole history
of priests and philosophers, that of artists also included
and you will see : the most virulent attacks on the
senses are not made by the impotent, nor by ascetics,
but by impossible ascetics, those who would have
required ascetic life . . .

3

The spiritualisation of sensuousness is called love ;
it is a grand triumph over Christianity. Our spiritual
isation of hostility is another triumph. It consists in
profoundly understanding the importance of having
enemies : in short, in acting and reasoning the reverse
of the former acting and reasoning. The Church al
ways wanted to exterminate its enemies : we, the im-
moralists and Anti-Christians, see our advantage in the
existence of the Church ... In political matters also
hostility has now become more spiritualised, much
more prudent, much more critical, much more forbearing.



MORALITY AS ANTI-XATURALNESS I2Q

Almost every party conceives that it is advantageous
for its self-maintenance if the opposite party does not
lose its power ; the same is true in grand politics.
A new creation especially, e. g., the new Empire,
has more need of enemies than of friends : it is
only in opposition that it feels itself indispensable,
that it becomes indispensable . . . Not otherwise do
we comport ourselves towards the " inner enemy ; "
there also we have spiritualised hostility, there also
we have understood its worth. People are productive
only at the cost of abounding in contrarieties ; they
only remain young provided the soul does not relax,
does not long after peace . . . Nothing has be
come more alien to us than the desirability of former
times, that of " peace of soul," Christian desirability ;
nothing makes us less envious than the moral cow
and the plump comfortableness of good conscience.
One has renounced grand life, when one has re
nounced war ... In many cases, to be sure, " peace
of soul" is merely a misunderstanding something
different, which does not just know how to name
itself more honestly. Without circumlocution and
prejudice let us take a few cases. " Peace of soul "
may, for example, be the mild radiation of a rich an-
imality into the moral (or religious) domain. Or the
beginning of fatigue, the first shadow which the even
ing every sort of evening casts. Or a sign that
the air is moist, that southern winds arrive. Or un-

9



I3O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

conscious gratitude for a good digestion (occasionally
called " charitableness "). Or the quieting down of the
convalescent to whom all things have a new taste
and who is waiting in expectancy. Or the condition
which follows upon a full gratification of our ruling
passion, the agreeable feeling of a rare satiety. Or
the senile weakness of our will, of our desires, of our
vices. Or laziness, persuaded by conceit to deck itself
out in moral guise. Or the attainment of a certainty,
even a dreadful certainty, after long suspense and
torture through uncertainty. Or the expression of
proficiency and mastery in doing, creating, effecting,
and willing, tranquil breathing, attained " freedom of
will." . . . Twilight of the Idols : who knows ? per
haps also just a modification of " peace of soul "...



4

I formulate a principle. All naturalism in morality,
i. e., all healthy morality, is ruled by an instinct of
life, some command of life is fulfilled by adopting a
certain canon of " thou shalt " and " thou shalt not,"
some hindrance and inimical agency on the way of
life is thereby removed. Anti-natural morality, on the
other hand (i. e., almost every morality which has
hitherto been taught, reverenced, and preached), directs
itself straight against the instincts of life, it condemns
those instincts, sometimes secretly, at other times loudly



MORALITY AS ANTI-NATURALNESS 13!

and insolently. Saying that " God looks on the heart,"
it negatives the lowest and the highest vital desirings,
and takes God as the enemy of life . . . The saint
in whom God finds his highest satisfaction is the
ideal castrate . . . Life is at an end where the " King
dom of God " begins . . .

5

If the wickedness of such a mutiny against life
as has become almost sacrosanct in Christian morality
has been understood, something else has, fortunately,
been understood besides : the uselessness, the unreality,
the absurdity, and the deceitfulness of such a mutiny.
For a condemnation of life on the part of a living
being is ultimately just the symptom of a certain kind
of life : the question whether rightly or wrongly is
not at all raised thereby. We would have to have a
position outside of life, and yet have to know it as
well as each and all who have lived it, to be authorised
to touch on the problem of the worth of life at all :
sufficient reason to convince us that for us the problem
is inaccessible. Speaking of values, we speak under
the influence of the inspiration and the optics of
life : life itself compels us to fix values ; life itself
values through us, when we fix values ... It follows
therefrom that even that anti-naturalness in moral
ity (which takes God as the counter-principle and
condemnation of life) is but an evaluation of life,

9 *



132 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

of which life ? of which kind of life ? But I have al
ready given the answer : of declining, weakened, fatigued,
condemned life. Morality, as it has hitherto been under
stood as it was hist formulated by Schopenhauer
as " denial of will to life "-is the actual decadence in
stinct which makes out of itself an imperative : it says,
" Perish ! " it is the valuation of the condemned .



Let us consider in the last place what naivete it
manifests to say, " Man ought to be so and so ! "
Reality exhibits to us an enchanting wealth of types,
the luxuriance of a prodigality of forms and trans
formations ; and some paltry hod-man of a moralist says
with regard to it, " Xo ! man ought to be different ! " . . .
He even knows how man ought to be, this parasite
and bigot : he paints himself on the wall and says,
" Ecce Jwmo /" . . . But even if the moralist directs
himself merely to the individual and says, " You
ought to be so and so," he still continues to make him
self ridiculous. The individual, in his antecedents and
in his consequents, is a piece of fate, an additional law,
an additional necessity for all that now takes place
and will take place in the future. To say to him,
" Alter thyself," is to require everything to alter itself,
even backward also . . . And in reality there have been
consistent moralists ; they wanted man to be other-



MORALITY AS ANTI-NATURALNESS 133

wise, namely, virtuous ; they wanted him fashioned
in their likeness, as a bigot : For that purpose they
denied the world. No insignificant madness ! No
modest form of presumption ! . . . Morality, in as far
as it condemns in itself, and not from regards,
considerations, or purposes of life, is a specific error
with which we must have no sympathy, it is a de
generate idiosyncrasy which has caused an unutterable
amount of harm ! . . . We others, we immoralists, on
the contrary, have opened our hearts for the recep
tion, of every kind of intelligence, conception, and ap
probation. We do not readily deny, we glory in being
affirmative. Our eyes have always opened more and
more for that economy which still uses and knows how
to use for its advantage all that is rejected by the
holy delirium of the priest, of the diseased reason of the
priest ; for that economy in the law of life which even
derives advantage from the offensive species of bigots,
priests, and the virtuous, what advantage ? But we
immoralists ourselves are the answer .



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS

i

Error of confounding cause and effect. There is
no more dangerous error than confounding conse
quence with cause : I call it the intrinsic depravity
of reason. Nevertheless, this error belongs to the
most ancient and the most modern habitudes of the
human race : it is consecrated even among us ; it
bears the names, " religion " and " morality." It is con
tained in every proposition which religion and morality
formulate : priests, and legislators in morals, are the
originators of this depravity of reason. I take an
example: everybody knows the book of the celebrated
Cornaro, in which he recommends his spare diet as a
recipe for a long and happy life, for a virtuous life
also. Few books have been read so much ; even yet
many thousand copies of it are annually printed in
England. I believe hardly any book (the Bible by
right excepted) has caused so much harm, has shortened
so many lives, as this well-meant curiosity. The



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 135

source of this mischief is in confounding consequence
with cause. The candid Italian saw in his diet the
cause of his long" life, while the pre-requisite to long
life, the extraordinary slowness of the metabolic pro
cess, small consumption, was the cause of his spare
diet. He was not at liberty to eat little or much ;
his frugality was not of " free will ; " he became sick
when he ate more. He who is not a carp, however,
not only does well to eat properly, but is obliged to
do so. A scholar of our day, with his rapid con
sumption of nerve-force, would kill himself with the
regime of Cornaro. Crede experto.



2

The most universal formula which lies at the basis
of every religious and moral system is, "Do so and
so, refrain from so and so then you will be happy !
In case of disobedience ..." Every system of morality,
every religion is this imperative ; I call it the great
original sin of reason, immortal unreason. In my
mouth, that formula transforms into its inversion the
first example of my " Transvaluation of all Values : "
a man well constituted, a " fortunate man," has to do
certain actions, and instinctively avoids other actions ;
he introduces the arrangement which he represents
physiologically into his relations to men and things.
In a formula : his virtue is the result of his good



136 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

fortune . . . Long life and an abundant posterity
are not the rewards of virtue : the very slowing of the
metabolic process, w r hich among other things, has in
its train a long life, an abundant posterity, in short,
Cornarism is rather virtue itself. The Church and
morality say that " a family, a people, is ruined through
vice and luxury." My re-established reason says that
when a people is perishing, when it degenerates
physiologically, vice and luxury follow therefrom
(i. e., the need of continually stronger and more
frequent stimulants, such as every exhausted nature
is acquainted with). This young man becomes pale
and withered at an early age. His friends say that
this or that sickness is the cause of it. My opinion
is that the fact of his becoming sick, the fact of his
inability to withstand the sickness, was from the
first the consequence of an impoverished life and
hereditary exhaustion. The newspaper readers say
that this party ruins itself by such and such an
error. My higher politics say that a party which
commits such errors is at its end its instincts are no
longer to be relied upon. Every error, whatever it
may be, is the result of degeneration of instinct, dis-
gregation of will : we thereby almost define the bad.
Everything good is instinct and consequently, easy,
necessary, free. Trouble is an objection, the God is
typically distinguished from the hero (in my language :
the light feet are the first attribute of Divinity).






THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 137

3

Error of false causality. It was always believed
that we knew what a cause was ; but whence did we
derive our knowledge, or, more exactly, our belief
that we knew about the matter ? Out of the domain
of the celebrated " inner facts," none of which have
hitherto proved themselves actual. We believed that
we ourselves acted causally in the exercise of will ;
we thougt there, at least, we had surprised causality
in the very act. In like manner people did not doubt
that all the antecedentia of an action, its causes, were
to be sought in consciousness, and would be redis
covered therein, if sought for as " motives : " for other
wise man would not have been free to act, he
would not have been answerable for his actions.
Finally, who would have disputed that a thought is
caused ? that the ego causes the thought ? . . . Of
those three " inner facts " by which causality appeared
to be guaranteed, the first and most convincing is
that of will as a cause ; the conception of consciousness
(" spirit ") as cause, and later still that of the ego
(the " subject ") as cause, are merely posthumous and
have originated when causality, derived from will, was
established as a given fact as empiricism ... In
the meantime we have changed our mind. We no longer
believe a word of it all. The " inner world " is full ot
phantoms and will-o -the-wisps : will is one of them.



138 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

Will no longer moves anything, consequently also it
no longer explains anything, it merely accompanies
proceedings, it can also be absent. The so-called
"motive" another error. Merely a surface phenomen
on of consciousness, some accompaniment of an act,
which conceals the antecedentia of an act rather than
manifests them. And above all the ego ! It has be
come a fable, a fiction, a play upon words ; it has
altogether ceased to think, to feel, and to will ! . . .
What follows therefrom ? There are no spiritual
causes at all ! The whole of the alleged empiricism
that seemed to be in their favour has gone to the devil !
That follows therefrom ! And we had made a fine abuse
of that " empiricism : " we had created the world on
that basis, as a world of causes, as a world of will, as
a world of spirit. The oldest psychology and the
longest maintained has here been at work, it has
really done nothing else. According to this psycho
logy, every occurence w r as an action, every action was
the result of a will ; the w r orld, according to it, be
came a plurality of acting agents ; an acting agent (a
" subject ") was insinuated into every occurrence. Man
has projected outside himself his three " inner facts,"
that in which he believed firmest of all, will, spirit,
and the ego, he only derived the conception of
being from the conception of the ego, he posited
" things " as existing according to his own likeness,
according to his conception of the ego as cause.



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 139

What wonder that later on he always just redis
covered in things what he had concealed in them?
The thing itself, we repeat, the conception of a
thing a reflection merely of the belief in the ego as
a cause . . . And even your atom, Messrs, the
Mechanists and Physicists, how much error, how much
rudimentary psychology, yet remains in your atom !
Not to speak of the " thing in itself," the horrendum
pudendum of metaphysicians ! The error of spirit as
a cause, confounded with reality ! And made the
measure of reality ! And called God !



4

Error of imaginary causes. To start from the
dream. For a definite sensation resulting, for example,
from the distant shot of a cannon, there is a cause
subsequently foisted on (often quite a little romance in
which the dreamer himself is the hero). The sensation, in
the meantime, persists as a sort of resonance ; it waits, as
it were, until the causal impulse permits it to move into
the foreground of consciousness now no longer as a
fortuitous incident, but as " meaning." The cannon shot
appears in a causal connection, with a seeming inversion
of time. The later, the motivation, is first realised,
often with a hundred details which pass like lightning ;
the shot follows . . . What has happened ? The ideas
generated by a certain bodily state were mistaken for



I4O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

its cause. As a matter of fact, we do just the same
when we are awake. Most of our general sensations
every sort of check, pressure, tension, or explosion
in the play and counter play of organs, especially
the condition of the nervus sympathicus excite our
causal impulse ; we want a reason for feeling so and
so, for feeling ill or well. It never suffices us merely
to establish the fact that we feel so and so : we only
acknowledge this fact we only become conscious of
it when we have furnished it with some kind of moti
vation. The recollection, which in such cases becomes
active without our being aware of it, calls up earlier
conditions of the same kind, and the causal inter
pretations associated with them, not their causality.
The belief that the associated ideas, the accompanying
proceedings of consciousness, have been the causes, is
also, to be sure, called up by recollection. There
thus originates an habituation to a fixed causal inter
pretation, which, in truth, checks the investigation of
causes, and even excludes it.



5

Psychological explanation. To trace back some
thing unknown to something known, relieves, quiets,
and satisfies, besides giving a sensation of power.
There is danger, disquiet, and solicitude associated
with the unknown, the primary instinct aims at



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 14!

doing away with these painful conditions. First prin
ciple : any explanation whatsoever is better than none.
Since, after all, it is only a question of wanting to get
rid of depressing ideas, people are not specially care
ful about the means for getting rid of them : the first
conception, by which the unknown declares itself to be
something known, is so pleasing that it is " taken
as true." Proof of desire (" power ") as criterion of
truth. The causal impulse is thus conditioned and
excited by the feeling of terror. The " why " is intended,
if possible, not so much for furnishing the cause on
its own account, as for furnishing a species of cause
a quieting, liberating, alleviating cause. The first
result of this need is that something already known,
something experienced, something inscribed in the
memory, is assigned as cause. The new, the un
experienced, the strange are excluded from being a
cause. Thus there is not only a mode of explanation
sought for as cause, but a select and privileged mode
of explanation that by means of which the feeling of
the strange, the new, and the unexperienced, has been
most quickly and most frequently got rid of, the
most common explanations. Result : a particular mode
of assigning causes preponderates more and more, con
centrates itself into a system, and finally becomes
predominant, i. e. } simply excluding other causes and
explanations. The banker immediately thinks of " busi
ness," the Christian of " sin," and the girl of her love.



142 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS



The whole domain of morality and religion comes
under this conception of imaginary causes. " Ex
planation " of unpleasant general feelings : They
are determined by beings hostile to us (evil spirits :
the most striking case mistaking hysterics for witches).
They are determined by conduct not to be approved
of (the feeling of " sin," of " sinfulness," foisted on to
a physiological unpleasantness one always finds rea
sons for being discontented with one s self). They are
determined as punishments, as a requital for something
we should not have done, for being otherwise than we
ought to be (audaciously generalised by Schopenhauer
into a thesis in which morality appears undisguised, as
the actual poisoner and calumniator of life : " every
sore pain, whether bodily or mental, indicates what we
deserve, for it could not come upon us, unless we
deserved it." Welt als Wille und Vorstellung 2, 666).
They are determined as consequences of inconsiderate
actions, which turn out badly (the emotions, the senses,
assigned as cause, as " guilty ; " states of physio
logical trouble explained as " deserved " by means of
other states of trouble). Explanations of pleasant
general feelings : They are determined by trust in
God. They are determined by the consciousness of
good conduct (so-called " good conscience," a phy
siological condition sometimes so like a g*ood di-



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 143

gestion as to be mistaken for it). They are determined
by the successful issue of undertakings (a naive fallacy :
the successful issue of an undertaking does not at all
produce any pleasant general feelings in a hypo
chondriac, or in a Pascal). They are determined by
faith, hope, and love the Christian virtues. In fact,
all these presumed explanations are resulting con
ditions, and as it were translations of pleasant and
unpleasant feelings into a false dialect : we are in a
condition to be hopeful, because our fundamental
physiological feeling is again strong and rich ; we
trust in God, because the feeling of fulness and of
strength gives us peace. Morality and religion be
long entirely to the Psychology of Error : in every
individual case cause and consequence are confounded ;
or truth is confounded with the result of what is
believed to be true ; or a condition of consciousness
is confounded with the causation of this condition.



7

Error of free will. Now we have no longer sym
pathy with the notion of " free will : " we know
only too well what it is the most disreputable of all
theological devices for the purpose of making men
" responsible " in their sense of the word, that is, for
the purpose of making them dependent on theologians . . .
Here, I only give the psychology of the process of



144 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

making men responsible. Wherever responsibilit}^ is
sought after, it is usually the instinct prompting to
punish and condemn which seeks after it. Becoming
has been divested of its innocence when any mode of
being whatsoever is traced back to will, to purposes,
or acts of responsibility : the dogma of will has
principally been invented for the purpose of punish
ment, i. e., with the intention of finding guilty.
The whole of old psychology, will-psychology, would
have been impossible but for the fact that its origin
ators (the priests at the head of the old com
monwealths) wanted to create for themselves a right
to impose punishment or a right for God to do so ...
Men were imagined to be "free," in order that they
might be condemned and punished, in order that
they might become guilty : consequently every activity
had to be thought of as voluntary, the origin of every
activity had to be thought of as residing in conscious
ness (whereby the most* absolute false -coinage in
psychologies was made a principle of psychology it
self . . .). Xow when we have entered upon a move
ment in the opposite direction, when we immoralists
especially endeavour with all our power to remove
out of the world the notions of guilt and punishment,
and seek to cleanse psychology, history, nature, social
institutions and sanctions from these notions, there is
not in our eyes any more fundamental antagonism
than that of theologians, who, with the notion of



THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS 145

a " moral order of the world," go on tainting the
innocence of becoming with " punishment " and " guilt."
Christianity is the hangman s metaphysics.



What alone can our teaching be ? That no one
gives a man his qualities, neither God, nor society,
nor his parents and ancestors, nor he himself (the latter
absurd idea here put aside has been taught as "intelli
gible freedom " by Kant, perhaps also by Plato).
No one is responsible for existing at all, for being
formed so and so, for being placed under those cir
cumstances and in this environment. His own destiny
cannot be disentangled from the destiny of all else
in past and future. He is not the result of a
special purpose, a will, or an aim, the attempt is not
here made to reach an " ideal of man," an " ideal of
happiness," or an " ideal of morality ; " it is absurd
to try to shunt off man s nature towards some
goal. We have invented the notion of a " goal : "
in reality a goal is lacking . . . We are neces
sary, we are part of destiny, we belong to the
whole, we exist in the whole, there is nothing which
could judge, measure, compare, or condemn our
being, for that would be to judge, measure, compare,
and condemn the whole . . . But there is nothing
outside of the whole / This only is the grand

10



146 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

emancipation : that no one be made responsible any
longer, that the mode of being be not traced back to
a causa prima, that the world be not regarded as a
unity, either as sensorium or as " spirit ; " it is only
thereby that the innocence of becoming is again
restored . . . The concept of " God " has hitherto
been the greatest objection to existence . . . We deny
God, we deny responsibility by denying God : it is
only thereby that we save the world.



THE "IMPROVERS" OF MANKIND

i

It is known what I require of philosophers namely,
to take up their position beyond good and evil, to be
superior to the illusion of moral sentiment. This
requirement follows from a principle which I formu
lated for the first time, namely, that there is no such
thing as a moral fact. Moral sentiment has this
in common with religious sentiment : it believes in
realities which do not exist. Morality is only an
interpretation of certain phenomena, or, more definitely,
a ^^interpretation of them. Moral sentiment belongs,
like religious sentiment, to a stage of ignorance in
which the very notion of the real, the distinction
between the real and the imaginary, is yet lacking:
accordingly, at such a stage of intellectual develop
ment, " truth " designates nothing but what we at
present call "fancies." In so far the moral sentiment is
never to be taken literally: as such it contains nothing
but absurdity. As semeiotic, however, its worth remains



148 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

inestimable : it reveals, at least to the initiated, the
most important realities of civilisations and internal
operations which did not know sufficient to "under
stand" themselves. Morality is merely sign language,
merely symptomatology ; one has to know beforehand
what it deals with, in order to derive advantage from it.



A first example, and quite preliminary. At all times
efforts have been made to " improve " human beings :
it is that above all things which has been termed
morality. The most different tendencies, however,
are concealed under the same name. The taming of
animal man, as w^ell as the breeding of a particular
species of human beings, has been called " improving ; "
only these zoological termini express realities,
realities, indeed, of which the typical " improver," the
priest, knows nothing does not want to know any
thing . . . To call the taming of an animal the " improv
ing" of it, sounds almost like a joke to our ears.
Anybody who knows what goes on in menageries will
be doubtful about the "improving" of animals there.
They are weakened, they are made less mischievous,
they become sick by the depressing emotion of fear,
by pain, wounds, and hunger.- It is precisely the same
with tamed man whom the priest has " improved." In
the early Middle Ages, when in fact the Church



THE "IMPROVERS" OF MANKIND 149

was a menagerie more than anything* else, the finest
specimens of the " blond beast " were everywhere
pursued the distinguished Germanics for example
were "improved." Afterwards, however, how did such
a Germanic look when " improved, " when seduced into
the monastery ? Like a caricature of man, like an ab
ortion : he had become a "sinner," he stuck fast in
the cage, he had got shut up in the midst of no
thing but frightful notions . . . And now he lay there,
sick, miserable, ill-disposed towards himself; full of
hatred against the vital instincts, full of suspicion with
regard to everything still strong and happy. In short,
a Christian . . . Physiologically explained : in combat
with the animal, the only means for making it weak
can be to sicken it. The Church understood this : it
ruined man, it weakened him, -but it claimed to have
"improved" him . . .



Let us take the other case of so-called morality,
the case of breeding a distinct race and species. Ind
ian morality, sanctioned into a religion as the "Law of
Manu," furnishes the grandest example. The task is
here set to breed no fewer than four races all at once :
a priestly race, a warrior race, a trading and agri
cultural race, and, finally, a menial race, the Sudras.
Here we are obviously no longer among the tamers



I5O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

of animals ; a race of men a hundred times milder
and more reasonable is presupposed, even to conceive
the plan of such a system of breeding. One recovers
breath on stepping into this healthier, higher, and
wider world out of the sickroom air and prison air of
Christianity. How paltry is the New Testament in
comparison with Manu, what a bad odour it has !
But that organisation also required to be formidable,
not, this time, in combat with the beast, but with
its own antithesis, the non-caste man, the mishmash
man, the Chandala. And again it had no other ex
pedient for making him harmless, for making him
weak, except making him sick, it was the struggle
with the " great number." Perhaps there is nothing
more repugnant to our feelings than tlwse precau
tionary measures of Indian morality. The third edict
for example (Avadana-Sastra I.), " concerning unclean
potherbs," ordains that the sole food allowed to the
Chandalas shall be garlic and onions, considering that
the holy writings forbid giving them grain, grain-
bearing fruits, water and fire. The same edict ordains
that the water they require must neither be taken
out of rivers, springs, or ponds, but only out of the
entrances to swamps, and out of holes made by the
footsteps of animals. In the same manner they are
forbidden both to wash their clothes and to wash
themselves, since the water, which is conceded to them
as a favour, must only be used to quench their thirst.



THE " IMPROVERS " OF MANKIND I 5 I

Finally, there is a prohibition forbidding the Sudra
women to assist the Chandala women at child-birth,
in like manner also a prohibition forbidding the latter
to assist one another on such occasions . . . The
result of such sanitary regulations did not fail to
appear : deadly epidemics, frightful sexual diseases, and,
in consequence thereof, the "law of the knife" once
more, which ordained circumcision for the male child
ren and the removal of the labia minor a in the
females. Manu himself says : " The Chandalas are the
fruit of adultery, incest, and crime (this is the necessary
consequence of the concept of breeding). They shall
only have the rags of corpses for clothing, for vessels
they shall only have broken pottery, for ornaments old
iron, for the worship of God only the evil spirits ; they
shall wander from place to place without repose. They
are forbidden to write from left to right, or to use the
right hand in writing : the use of the right hand and
from-left-to-right are reserved exclusively for the vir
tuous, for persons of race"



4

These enactments are sufficiently instructive : here
for once we have Aryan humanity, perfectly pure, per
fectly original, we learn that the idea of " pure blood "
is the contrary of a harmless idea. On the other
hand, it becomes manifest in which nation the hatred,



152 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

the Chandala hatred against this " humanity," has im
mortalised itself, where it has become religion, and
genius . . . From this point of view the Gospels are
documents of the first importance, and the book of
Enoch even more so. Christianity springing out of
a Jewish root, and only comprehensible as a growth
of this soil, represents the movement counter to every
morality of breeding, of race, and of privilege : it
is anti- Aryan religion par excellence : Christianity,
the transvaluation of all Aryan values, the triumph
of Chandala values, the gospel preached to the poor
and lowly, the collective insurrection against "race"
of all the down-trodden, the wretched, the ill-consti
tuted, the misfortunate, undying Chandala revenge as
religion of love . . .



The morality of breeding and the morality of
taming are perfectly worthy of one another as regards
the expedients for achieving their ends : we may lay
it down as our highest proposition, that in order to
create morality, it is necessary to have the absolute
will to the contrary. This is the great, the unearthly
problem which I have longest applied myself to : the
psychology of the " improvers " of mankind. A small
and modest matter after all, so-called pia fraus, gave
me the first access to this problem : fia fraus, the



THE "IMPROVERS" OF MANKIND 153

heritage of all philosophers and priests who have
" improved " mankind. Neither Manu, nor Plato, nor
Confucius, nor the Jewish and Christian teachers, have
ever doubted of their right to use falsehood. They
have not doubted with regard to quite other rights . . .
Expressed in a formula one might say that all the
measures hitherto used for the purpose of moralising
mankind, have been fundamentally immoral.



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK



Among Germans at present, it is not sufficient
to have esprit ; one must appropriate it practically, one
must presume to have it.

Perhaps I know the Germans, perhaps I may even
say a few truths to them. Modern Germany exhibits
a great amount of hereditary and indoctrinated capa
city, so that it can even spend prodigally for a while
its accumulated treasure of force. It is not a high
civilisation that has here gained the ascendency, still
less a delicate taste, or a superior " beauty " of the
instincts, but manlier virtues than any other country
in Europe can exhibit. Much good humour and self-
respect, much firmness in dealing with one another,
in reciprocity of obligations, much laboriousness, much
endurance, and a hereditary moderation which re
quires the goad rather than the brake. I also add
that here there is still obedience, without its being
humiliating . . . And nobody despises his opponent . . .



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK



00



It is obviously my wish to be just to the Germans :
I should not like to be unfaithful to myself in this
matter, consequently I have to tell them what I ob
ject to. It costs dear to attain to power : power
stupefies . . . The Germans they were once called
the nation of thinkers ; do they really at present think
at all ? The Germans are bored with intellect now-
a-days, they mistrust it, politics swallow up all serious
ness for really intellectual matters, "Deutschland,
Deutschland ilbcr alles, "* I fear that has been the
end of German philosophy . . . "Are there German
philosophers ? are there German poets ? are there good
German books ? " people ask me abroad : I blush ; but
with the courage which is peculiar to me even in
desperate cases, I answer, " Yes, Bismarck ! " Could
I even dare to confess what books people read now-
a-days ? . . . Accursed instinct of mediocrity !



Who has not had melancholy reflections con
cerning the possibilities of German esprit ! But this
nation has arbitrarily stupefied itself for nearly a thou
sand years : nowhere have the two great European
narcotics, alcohol and Christianity, been more wickedly
misused. Recently, a third has been introduced, with
which alone every refined and bold activity of intellect

* The German national hymn.



156 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

can be wiped out music, our constipated, constipating
German music. How much moody heaviness, lame
ness, humidity, and dressing-gown mood, how r much
beer is in German intelligence ! How is it really
possible that young men, who consecrate their existence
to the most intellectual ends, do not feel in themselves
the first instinct of intellectuality, the self-preservative
instinct of intellect and drink beer ? . . . The alcohol
ism of the learned youth is perhaps no interrogative
sign with reference to their learnedness one can be
very learned even without esprit, but in every other
respect it remains a problem. Where do we not find
it, the mild intellectual degeneration caused by beer !
I once laid my finger on an instance of such dege
neration, a case almost become celebrated that of our
first German freethinker, the shrewd David Strauss,
who degenerated into an author of a drinking-saloon
gospel and a " New Belief." Not with impunity had he
made his vow in verses to the " lovely brunette " *
loyalty to death . . .



3

I spoke of German esprit to the effect that it
becomes coarser and shallower.. Is that enough ? In
reality, it is something quite different which frightens



Beer.



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK 157

me ; German seriousness, German profundity, and Ger
man passion in intellectual matters, are more and more
on the decline. Pathos has altered, not merely intellect
uality. I come in contact now and then with German
universities : what an atmosphere prevails among their
scholars, what withered, contented, and lukewarm in
tellectuality ! It would be a great misunderstanding
if a person should adduce German science by way of
objection to me, and, besides, it would be a proof
that he had not read a word of my writings. For
seventeen years I have not tired of showing the in
tellectually enervating influence of our modern scientific
pursuits. The severe helotism to which the immense
extent of the sciences at present condemns every in
dividual, is a principal reason why the more fully, more
richly, and more profoundly endowed natures no longer
find suitable education and suitable educators. There
is nothing from which our civilisation suffers more
than from the superfluity of presumptuous hod-men
and fragmental humanities ; our universities are, against
their will, the real forcing-houses for this mode of
stunted growth of intellectual instincts. And all Europe
has already an idea of it grand politics deceive no
body . . . Germany is more and more regarded as
the flat-land of Europe. I still seek for a German
with whom / might be serious in my own way, -how
much more for one with whom I could be cheerful !
Twilight of the Idols : ah ! who can conceive at present



158 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

from ^Ji at seriousness a philosopher here recruits him
self ! Our cheerfulness is what is least understood .



4

Let us make an estimate. It is not only manifest
that German civilisation declines, there is also sufficient
reason for it. No one can ultimately spend more than
he possesses : that is true of individuals, it is true
also of nations. If we expend our means on power,
grand politics, economy, international commerce, par
liamentarism, or military interests, if we give away
the quantity of understanding, seriousness, will, and
self-overcoming, which constitutes us, on this side, it
is lacking on the other. Civilisation and the state let
us not delude ourselves with regard to the matter-
are antagonists : " civilised state " is merely a modern
idea. The one lives on the other, the one nourishes
at the expense of the other. All great periods of
civilisation are periods of political decadence : \vhatever
has been great as regards civilisation, has been non-
political, even anti-political. Goethe s heart opened on
the phenomenon of Napoleon, it closed on the " War
of Liberation "... At the same time that Germany
comes forward as a great power, France acquires a
changed importance as a power of civilisation. Much
new intellectual seriousness and passion is already
transferred to Paris ; the question of pessimism, for



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK 159

example ; the question of Wagner, and almost all
psychological and artistic questions are there discussed
in an incomparably more refined and more thorough
manner than in Germany, the Germans themselves
are incapacitated for that kind of seriousness. In the
history of European civilisation there is one thing
especially which the rise of the " Empire " indicates :
a displacement of the centre of gravity. Everybody
is aware of it already : in the most important matter
and that is civilisation the Germans are no longer
of any account. It is asked : have you even a single
intellect to point to that counts in Europe, as your
Goethe, your Hegel, your Heinrich Heine, and your
Schopenhauer counted ? There is no end of astonish
ment that there is no longer a single German philo
sopher.

5

In all higher education in Germany, the main
thing has been lost : the end, as well as the means
for reaching it. That education, culture, itself, is
the end and not " the Empire ; " that for this end
there is need of educators not public-school teachers
and university scholars : that has been forgotten . . .
Educators are necessary, who are themselves educated
superior, noble intellects, who are proved every
moment, who are proved whether they speak or are
silent, mature and sweetened civilisations, not the



l6o THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

learned lubbers which the public-schools and universities
at present offer to the youths as " higher nurses. " The
educators arc lacking (save the exceptions of excep
tions) the primary pre-requisite of education : hence the
decadence of German civilisation. One of those rarest
exceptions is my worthy friend, Jacob Burckhardt of
Bale : it is to him, above all, that Bale owes its pre
eminence in Humanity. What the " higher schools "
of Germany actually realise, is a brutal training in order
that, with the least possible loss of time, an immense
number of young men may be fitted to be used, used
^lp, as government officials. " Higher education " and
immense numbers that is a contradiction in principle.
All higher education belongs to the exceptions only :
one has to be privileged to have a right to so
high a privilege. All that is great, all that is fine,
can never be a common possession : pulchrum est
paucorum hominum. What determines the decadence
of German civilisation ? That " higher education " is
no longer a privilege democratism of " universal ",
communised " culture "... Not to forget that military
privileges compel the too-great-attendance at the higher
schools, which means their ruin. In the Germany of to
day no one is any longer at liberty to give his children
a noble education : our " higher " schools are all of
them adapted to the most equivocal mediocrity, as
regards their teachers, plans of study, and educational
aims. And everywhere there is an unbecoming haste,



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK l6l

as if something were wrong, when the young man
of twenty-three is not yet " finished," does not yet
know the answer to the " main question : " what calling ?
A higher class of men, let it be said, do not like
" callings, " precisely because they know they are
called . . . They have time, they take their time, they
do not at all think about getting " finished ; " at thirty
years of age a person is a beginner, a child in the
sphere of high civilisation. Our over -filled public-
schools, our overloaded, stupefied public-school teachers
are a scandal : there may perhaps be motives for de
fending this condition of things, as the professors of
Heidelberg have done recently, there are no reasons
for it.



In order not to come short of my special mode
(which is affirmative, and only deals mediately and
involuntarily with contradiction and criticism), I at
once state the three tasks for the fulfilment of which
educators are required. The youth have to learn to see,
they have to learn to think, they have to learn to
speak and write : the object in all three cases is a
noble civilisation. To learn to see to accustom the
eye to quietness, to patience, to reserve ; to postpone
judgment, to survey and comprehend each case from
all sides. This is the first preliminary schooling for in
tellectuality : not to react immediately upon a stimu-



I 62 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

lus, but to get the checking, the settling instincts in
hand. Learning to see, as I understand it, is almost
the same thing as in unphilosophical language is
called strong will : the essential thing there is just
not to " will, " the ability to defer decision. All
spiritlessness, all vulgarity rests on the inability to
offer resistance to a stimulus people are obliged to
react, they follow every impulse. In many cases
such a compulsion is already morbidness, decadence,
a symptom of exhaustion, almost all that unphilo
sophical crudeness designates by the word " vice, " is
merely that physiological inability not to . react. A
practical application of having learned to see : As
learners, people will in general have become slow,
mistrustful, and reluctant. With hostile quietude they
will let the strange and the new of every description
approach at first,- they will withdraw their hand, so
as not to be touched by it. The being open by all
doors, the servile prostration before every insignificant
fact, the continuous lurking to put one s self, to throw
one s self among other people and other things, in
short, vaunted modern " objectivity" is bad taste, it is
ignoble par excellence.

7

Learning to think : people have no longer any
notion of it in our schools. Even in the universities,
even among philosophical scholars themselves, logic



WHAT THE GERMANS LACK 163

begins to die out, alike as a theory, as a practice, and as
a profession. Let anyone read German books : there is
no longer the remotest recollection that a technique,
a plan of instruction, and a will to reach proficiency
are required for thinking, that thinking requires to be
learned as dancing requires to be learned, as a mode
of dancing . . . Who among the Germans as yet
knows by experience that refined tremor which
nimble feet in the field of intellect communicate
to all muscles ! The stiff doltishness of intellectual
bearing, the clumsy hand in grasping that is German
in such a degree that abroad it is altogether con
founded with the German nature. The German has
no fingers for nuances . . . That the Germans have
even endured their philosophers, more especially that
most deformed conceptual cripple that has ever existed,
the great Kant, gives no small concept of German
elegance. In effect, no form of dancing can be ex
cluded from a higJi class education ability to dance
with the feet, with concepts, and with words : have I
still to say one must be capable of it with the pen
also one must learn to write ? But at this point I
should become a perfect puzzle to German readers . . .



1 1



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE
PHILOSOPHER



My impracticables. Seneca, or the toreador of
virtue. Rousseaii, or return to nature in impuris
naturalibus. Schiller, or the moral Trumpeter of
Sackingen. Dante, or the hyena poetising in tombs.

Kant, or cant as an intelligible character. Victor
Hugo, or Pharos in the sea of absurdity. Liszt, or
the school of running after women. George Sand, or
lactea ubcrtas ; i. c., the milch-cow with " the fine
style. " Michelet, or enthusiasm which strips off the
coat. Carlyle, or pessimism as an undigested dinner.

John Stuart Mill, or offensive transparency. Les
freres de Goncourt, or the two Ajaxes struggling
with Homer. Music by Offenbach. Zola, or " the
delight to stink. *

2

Rcnan. Divinity, or the perversion of reason by
" original sin " (Christianity) : witness Renan, who,



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 165

whenever he ventures a more general affirmation or
negation, fails to catch the point with painful regularity.
For example, he would like to unite into one la science
and la noblesse ; la science, however, belongs to de
mocracy that is perfectly obvious. He desires, with
no little ambition, to represent an intellectual aristo-
cratism ; but at the same time he lies on his knees
(and not on his knees only) before the antithetical
doctrine, the evangile des humbles . . . What is the
good of all freethinking, modernism, gibing, and wry-
necked dexterity, if you continue to be a Christian, a
Roman Catholic, and even a priest, in your intestines !
Kenan s ingenuity lies in his seductiveness, just as in
the case of the Jesuit and the confessor ; the broad
priestly smirk is not lacking in his intellectuality, like
all priests he only becomes dangerous when he loves.
Nobody equals him in his faculty for idolising in a
fatally dangerous manner . . . This spirit of Renan,
a spirit which enervates, is an additional calamity for
poor, sick, feeble-willed France.



3

Sainte-Beuve. Nothing of a man ; full of petty re
sentment against all masculine intellects. Wanders about
delicate, curious, tired, "pumping" people, a female
after all, with a woman s revengefulness and a woman s
sensuousness. As a psychologist a genius for medisance ;



I 66 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

inexhaustibly rich in expedients for the purpose ;
nobody understands better how to mix poison with
praise. Plebeian in his lowest instincts and allied with
the ressentiment of Rousseau : consequently a Romanti
cist for Rousseau s instinct grunts and yearns for re
venge under all romantisme. A revolutionist, though
held tolerably in check by fear. Ill at ease in presence
of everything possessing strength (public opinion, the
Academy, the Court, and even Port Royal). Embittered
against all greatness in men and things, against all
that believes in itself. Poet enough and half-woman
enough to be sensible of greatness as a power ; con
tinually turning like the celebrated worm, because
he continually feels himself trodden upon. As a critic,
without a standard, without firmness, and without
backbone, with the tongue of the cosmopolitan libertin
in favour of variety, but even without sufficient cour
age to confess the libertinage. As an historian, without
a philosophy, without the power of philosophic vision,
on that account declining the task of passing judgment
in all great questions, holding up " objectivity " as a
mask. He behaves otherwise, however, with regard
to all matters where a delicate, worn out taste is the
highest tribunal ; there he really has the courage of
himself, pleasure in himself there he is a master. In
some respects a prototype of Baudelaire.



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 167

4

The Imitatio Christi is one of the books which
I cannot hold in my hand without a physiological
resistance: it exhales a. par/urn of the eternally feminine,
for which one has to be French or Wagnerian . . .
This saint has such a way of speaking about love that
even the Parisiennes become curious. I am told that
A. Comte, that shrewdest of Jesuits, who wanted to
lead his fellow countrymen to Rome by the indirect
route of science, inspired himself by this book. I be
lieve it : the " religion of the heart "...



5

George Eliot. They have got rid of Christian God,
and now, think themselves obliged to cling firmer
than ever to Christian morality : that is English con
sistency ; we shall not lay the blame of it on ethical
girls a la Eliot. In England, for every little emanci
pation from divinity, people have to re-acquire respect
ability by becoming moral fanatics in an awe-inspiring
manner. That is the penalty they have to pay there.
With us it is different. When we give up Christian
belief, we thereby deprive ourselves of the right to
maintain a stand on Christian morality. This is not
at all obvious of itself ; we have again and again
to nrnke this point clear, in defiance of English



I 68 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

shallow-pates. Christianity is a system, a view of
things, consistently thought out and complete. If we
break out of it a fundamental idea, the belief in God,
we thereby break the whole into pieces : we have no
longer anything determined in our grasp. Christianity
presupposes that man does not know, cannot know
what is good for him and what is evil ; he believes
in God, who alone knows. Christian morality is a
command, its origin is transcendent, it is beyond all
criticism, beyond all right of criticism ; it has solely
truth, if God is truth, it stands or falls with the
belief in God. If in fact the English imagine they
know, of their own accord, "intuitively" what is
good and evil, if they consequently imagine they
have no more need of Christianity as a guarantee
of morality ; that itself is merely the result of
the ascendency of Christian valuation, and an ex
pression of its strength and profundity : to such an
extent that the origin of English morality has been
forgotten : to such an extent that the strictly con
ditional character of its right to existence is no longer
perceived. Morality is not as yet a problem for the
English . . .



George Sand. I read the first Lettres d un Voya-
geur : like all derived from Rousseau, false, artificial,
inflated, exaggerated. I cannot stand this variegated



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 69

wall-paper style ; nor the vulgar ambition for generous
feelings. But the worst, surely, is the woman s co
quetry with masculine characteristics, with the manners
of ill-bred boys. How cold she must have been withal,
this insufferable artist ! She wound herself up like a
timepiece and wrote . . . Cold like Hugo, like Balzac,
like all Romanticists, as soon as they began to
write ! And how self-complacently she may then have
reposed, this productive writing cow, who, like her
master Rousseau himself, had in her something German
in the bad sense, and at all events, was only possible
owing to the decline of French taste ! But Renan
adores her . . .

7

A. moral for psychologists. Never to occupy one s
self with colportage psychology ! Never to observe
for the sake of observing ! That results in false optics,
in squinting, in something forced and exaggerated.
Experiencing, as a desire to experience that does
not do. In experiencing anything, one imist not
look towards one s self; every look then becomes an
" evil eye. " A born psychologist is instinctively on
his guard against seeing for the sake of seeing ; the
same is true of the born painter. He never works
" according to nature, " he leaves the sifting and
expressing of the " case, " of " nature, " or of the
" experienced, " to his instinct, to his camera obscura . . .



I7O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

He only becomes conscious of what is general, the
conclusion, the result ; he is unacquainted with that
arbitrary abstracting from single cases. What is the
result when people do otherwise ? for example, when
they carry on colportage psychology after the manner
of great and small Parisian romanciers ? That mode
of business lies in wait, as it were, for the actual,
it brings home a handful of curiosities every even
ing . . . But let us only see what finally results
from it. A pile of daubs, at the best a mosaic, in
every case something pieced together, disquieting,
loud-coloured. The Gon courts are the worst sinners
in this respect ; they do not put three sentences to
gether, w^hich are not simply painful to the eye, to
the psychologist ^^. Nature, estimated artistically, is
no model. It exaggerates, it distorts, it leaves gaps.
Nature is accident. Studying " according to nature "
seems to me a bad sign ; it betrays subjection, weak
ness, fatalism ; this lying-in-the-dust before petits faits
is unworthy of a complete artist. Seeing what is
that belongs to another species of intellects, to the
anti-artistic, to the practical. One has to know who
one is .



A psychology of the artist. To the existence of
art, to the existence of any aesthetic activity or
perception whatsoever, a preliminary psychological



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 171

condition is indispensable, namely, ecstasy. Ecstasy
must first have intensified the sensitiveness of the
whole mechanism ; until this takes place art is not
realised. All kinds of ecstasy, however differently
conditioned, possess this power ; above all the ecstasy
of sexual excitement, the oldest and most primitive
form of ecstasy. In like manner the ecstasy which
follows in the train of all great desires, of all strong
emotions ; the ecstasy of the feast, of the contest, of
a daring deed, of victory, of all extreme agitation ;
the ecstasy of cruelty ; the ecstasy in destruction ; the
ecstasy under certain meteorological influences for
example, spring ecstasy ; or under the influence of
narcotics ; finally, the ecstasy of will, the ecstasy
of an overcharged and surging will. The essential
thing in ecstasy is the feeling of increased power and
profusion. Out of this feeling w T e impart to things,
we constrain them to accept something from us, we
force them by violence ; this proceeding is called
idealising. Let us here free ourselves from a preju
dice : idealising does not consist, as is commonly be
lieved, in an abstraction or deduction of the insignifi
cant or the contingent. An immense forcing oiit of
principal traits is rather the decisive characteristic, so
that the others thereby disappear.



I 72 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

9

In this condition we enrich everything out of our
own profusion ; what we see, and what we wish for
we see enlarged, crowded, strong, and overladen with
power. He who, in this condition, transforms things
till they mirror his power, till they are reflections of
his perfection. This constraint to transform into the
perfect is art. Everything that he is not, neverthe
less becomes for him a delight in himself; in art man
enjoys himself as perfection. It would be allowable
to imagine an opposite state of things, a specific
anti-artisticalness of instinct a mode of being which
would impoverish everything, attenuate everything,
make everything consumptive. In fact, history fur
nishes us with abundance of such anti-artists, persons
with starved lives, who must necessarily lay hold of
things, drain them, and make them more emaciated.
This is the case with the genuine Christian, Pascal,
for example ; a Christian, who is at the same time an
artist, is not to be found. Let no one be childish
enough to refer me to the case of Raphael, or to
any homoeopathic Christian of the nineteenth century.
Raphael said yea, he did yea ; consequently Raphael
w^as no Christian .



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 173

10

What do the antithetical notions Apollinian and
Dionysian (which I have introduced into aesthetics)
imply, when we conceive of them both as modes of
ecstasy ? Apollinian ecstasy above all keeps the eye
on the alert, so that it acquires the faculty of vision. The
painter, the sculptor, and the epic poet, are visionaries
par excellence. In the Dionysian condition, on the
other hand, the entire emotional system is excited, and
has its energies augmented ; so that it discharges
itself simultaneously by all channels of expression, and
forces the faculties of representation, of imitation, of
transfiguration, of metamorphosis all kinds of mimi
cry and acting into activity at one and the same
time. The essential thing is the easiness of the meta
morphosis, the incapacity to resist a stimulus (similar
to the case of certain hysterical patients, who also act
every role at every hint). It is impossible for
Dionysian man not to understand any suggestion,
he overlooks no symptom of emotion, he possesses
the highest manifestation of knowing and divining
instinct, as also the highest development of communi
cative art. He assumes every external appearance,
every emotion ; he changes himself continually. Music,
as we understand it at present, is also a collective
excitement and collective discharge of the emotions,
nevertheless it is only the survival of a much wider



174 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

world of emotional expression, a mere residuum of
Dionysian histrionism. To make music possible as
a separate art, several of the senses especially
muscular sense have here been eliminated (relatively
at least, for to a certain extent all rhythm still speaks
to our muscles); so that man no longer immediately
imitates and gives bodily expression to every feeling.
Nevertheless that is the Dionysian normal conditon,
at any rate the original condition : music is the slowly
attained specialisation of this condition at the cost of
the faculties nearest akin to it.



1 1

The actor, the mime, the dancer, the musician, and
the lyric poet are fundamentally akin in their instincts
and one in their essence, but they have gradually
specialised and separated from one another till indeed
they are in contradiction. The lyric poet remained
longest united with the musician ; the actor remained
longest connected with the dancer. The architect re
presents neither a Dionysian, nor an Apollinian con
dition ; here it is the great act of will, the will which
removes mountains, ecstasy of the strong will that is
desirous of art. The most powerful men have always
inspired architects ; the architect has always been
under the suggestion of power. In the work of
architecture pride, triumph over gravity and will to



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 175

power, are intended to display themselves; architecture
is a sort of eloquence of power embodied in forms,
sometimes persuading, even nattering, and sometimes
merely commanding. The highest feeling of power
and security is expressed in that which has the
grand style. Power which needs no further demon
stration, which scorns to please, which answers un
willingly, which has no sense of any witness near it,
which is without consciousness that there is opposition
to it, which reposes in itself, fatalistic, a law among
laws : that is what speaks of itself as the grand style.



12

I read the Life of Thomas Carlyle, that unconscious
and unintended farce, that heroico-moral interpretation
of dyspeptic conditions. Carlyle, a man of strong
words and attitudes, a rhetorician from necessity, who
was continually irritated by the longing for a strong
belief and the feeling of incapacity for it (in that re
spect a typical Romanticist !). The longing for a
strong belief is not evidence of a strong belief, rather
the contrary. When one has this belief, one may
allow one s self the choice luxury of scepticism ; one is
sufficiently sure, sufficiently resolute, and sufficiently
bound for doing so. Carlyle deafens something in his
nature by the fortissimo of his reverence for men of
strong belief, and by his rage against the less stupid ;



176 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

he requires noise. A constant, passionate insincerity
towards himself that is his proprium ; he is interesting,
and will remain interesting thereby. In England, to
be sure, he is admired precisely on account of his
sincerity . . Well, that is English ; and in consideration
that the English are the people of consummate cant,
it is not merely conceivable, but appropriate. After
all, Carlyle is an English atheist, w r ho aspires to honour
for not being- one.



13

Euicrsou. Much more enlightened, more discursive,
more varied, more refined than Carlyle, above all more
fortunate ... One who instinctively nourishes himself
solely with ambrosia, leaving alone what is indigestible
in things. A man of taste in comparison with Carlyle.

Carlyle, who had much love for Emerson, said never
theless, " he does not give us enough to chew," which
may rightly be said, but not to Emerson s prejudice.

Emerson possesses that kind-hearted and ingenious
cheerfulness, which discourages all sternness ; he does
not by any means know how old he is already, and
how young he wall yet be ; he could say of himself,
with an expression of Lope de Vega : " yo me sucedo
a mi mismo ". His mind always finds reasons for
being contented, and even grateful ; and now r and
then verges on the cheerful transcendence of that



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 7 7

worthy man, who, returning from a love appointment,
tanquam re lene gesta, said thankfully, " Ut desint
vires, tamen est laudanda voluptas".



Anti- Darwin. As regards the celebrated " struggle
for life," it seems to me, in the mean time, to be
more asserted than proved. It occurs, but only as an
exception ; the general aspect of life is not a state of
want or hunger ; it is rather a state of opulence,
luxuriance, and even absurd prodigality, where there
is a struggle, it is a struggle for power. We must
not confound Malthus with nature. Granted, however
that this struggle exists and in fact it does occur,
its results, alas, are the reverse of what the Darwinian
school wish, the reverse of what one might perhaps
wish, in accordance with them : it is prejudicial to the
strong, the privileged, the fortunate exceptions. The
species does not grow in perfection : the weak
again and again get the upper hand of the strong,
their large number and their greater cunning are the
cause of it. Darwin forgot the intellect (that was
English !) ; the weak have more intellect. ... One must
need intellect in order to acquire it ; one loses it
when it is no longer necessary. He who has strength
rids himself of intellect (" let it go hence ! " * is what

* An allusion to Luther s song, Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott !

12



178 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

people think in Germany at present, "the Empire will
remain " . . .). As is obvious, under intellect I comprehend
foresight, patience, craft, dissimulation, grand self-
control, and all modifications of mimicry. A great
deal of so-called virtue is included under mimicry.



15

Psychologist Casuistry. This individual is an ex
pert in the knowledge of men : for what end is he
actually studying men ? He wants to get some little
advantages over them, or even some great advantages,
he is a politicits / . . . That individual is also an
expert in the knowledge of men, and you say he
wants nothing for himself thereby, he is one of the
grand " impersonal. " Look at him more carefully !
Perhaps he even wants a more reprehensible advan
tage : to feel himself superior to men, to be allowed
to look down on them, not to confound himself with
them any longer. This " impersonal one " is a despiser
of men ; the former is the more humane species, what
ever appearance may indicate. He at least places
himself on an equality with men, he places himself
among them . . .

16

The psychological tact of the Germans seems to
me to be called in question by a whole series of cases,



!

\



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 179

a list of which my modesty prevents me from bringing
forward. In one case a remarkable inducement will
not be lacking to establish my thesis : I have a grudge
against the Germans for having made a mistake about
Kant and his "back-door philosophy," as I call it, that
was not the type of intellectual honesty. That other
thing which I do not like to hear is a notorious " and : "
the Germans say " Goethe and Schiller ; " I am afraid
lest they say " Schiller and Goethe " : . . Is this Schiller
not yet known ? There are still worse " ands ; " I
have heard with my own ears, "Schopenhauer and
Hartmann ; * to be sure, only among university
professors . . .



The most intellectual men, provided they are the
most courageous, experience by far the most painful tra
gedies ; but they reverence life just on that account,
because it places its most powerful hostile forces in
opposition to them.

18

"Intellectual conscience." Nothing seems to me
to be rarer at present than genuine hypocrisy. I have
a strong suspicion that the mild air of our civilisation
is not beneficial to this plant. Hypocrisy belongs to the
ages of strong belief when people did not part with
their own belief, even under the constraint of showing



ISO THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

off another belief. At present people part with it ;
or, what is more common, they provide themselves
with a second belief, in all cases they remain honest.
Undoubtedly, there is at present a very much greater
variety of convictions possible than there were for
merly : possible, that is to say they are permitted,
they do no harm. Out of this state of things tolerance
towards one s self originates. Tolerance towards one s
self permits of se\eral convictions ; these live together
in agreement, they take care, as everybody does at
present, not to compromise themselves. What does
one compromise one s self with at present ? If one
is consistent. If one goes in a straight line. If one
is less than quinquivocal. If one is genuine . . .
I very much fear that modern man is simply too
comfortable for some vices ; so that these die out
altogether. Everything wicked which is determined
by strong will perhaps there is nothing wicked
without strength of will degenerates to virtue in our
lukewarm atmosphere . . . The few hypocrites I have
become acquainted with imitated hypocrisy ; they were
actors, like almost every tenth man at present. -



Beautiful and ugly. Nothing is more conditioned,
let us say more restricted, than our sense of the
beautiful. A person who would try to think of it as



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 8 I

detached from the delight of man in man would im
mediately lose his footing. The "beautiful in itself"
is merely an expresssion, not even a concept. In
the beautiful, man posits himself as the standard of
perfection ; in select cases he worships himself in that
standard. A species cannot possibly do otherwise
than thus to say yea to itself. Its lowest instinct, that
of self-maintenance and self-expansion, still radiates in
such sublimities. Man believes the world itself to be
overcharged with beauty, he forgets that he is the
cause of it. He alone has endowed it with beauty,
alas ! only with very human, all-too-human beauty . . .
In reality man mirrors himself in things ; he counts
everything beautiful which reflects his likeness ; the
verdict " beautiful " is man s conceit of his species. A
little suspicion may in fact whisper the question into
a sceptic s ear Is the world really beautified, just
because man thinks it is ? Man has humanised it ; that
is all. But nothing, nothing whatever warrants us in
supposing that it is just man who furnishes the model
of the beautiful. Who knows how he appears in the
eyes of a higher judge of taste ? Perhaps risky ?
perhaps even entertaining ? perhaps a little arbitrary ? . .
" Oh divine Dionysos, why dost thou pull mine ears ? "
asked Ariadne once of her philosophic lover, in one
of the celebrated dialogues at Naxos. " I find a sort
of humour in thine ears, Ariadne : why are they not
longer ? "



1 82 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

20

Nothing is beautiful, except man : all aesthetics
rest on this naivete, it is their first truth. Let us
straightway add the second : nothing is ugly, except
degenerating man ; the domain of aesthetic judg
ment is thereby limited. Re-examined physiologi
cally, all that is ugly weakens and afflicts man. It
reminds him of deterioration, of danger, and of im
potence ; he actually suffers loss of power by it. The
effect of ugliness can be measured by the dynamo
meter. Whenever man is depressed he has a sense
of the proximity of something "ugly." His sense of
power, his will to power, his courage, his pride they
decrease with the ugly, they increase with the beautiful.
In both cases we draw an inference, the premises of
which are accumulated in enormous fulness in instinct.
The ugly is understood as a sign and symptom of
degeneration ; that which reminds us in the re
motest manner of degeneracy prompts us to pro
nounce the verdict, " ugly. " Every indication of ex
haustion, gravity, age, or lassitude ; every kind of
constraint, such as cramp or paralysis ; and above all the
odour, the colour, and the likeness of decomposition or
putrefaction, be it utterly attenuated even to a symbol :
all these things call forth a similar reaction, the
evaluation "ugly." A hatred is there excited : whom
does man hate there ? There can be no doubt : the



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX IXOPPORTUXE PHILOSOPHER 183

decline of his type. The hatred is inspired by the most
profound instinct of the species ; there is horror, fore
sight, profundity, and far-reaching vision in it it is
the profoundest of all hatreds. On account of it, art
is profound.

2 I

Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer, the last German who
comes into consideration (who is a European event,
like Goethe, like Hegel, like Heinrich Heine, and not
merely a local, a "national" occurrence), is a case of
the first rank for a psychologist, as being an ill-natured,
ingenious attempt to bring into the field, in favour
of a general nihilistic valuation of the whole of life,
the very opposite instances, the grand self-affirmations
of " will to life, " the exuberant forms of life. He has
interpreted in turn art, heroism, genius, beauty, grand
sympathy, knowledge, will for truth, and tragedy, as
phenomena resulting from " negation, " or from the
need of negation of "will," the most spurious psycho
logical mintage, Christianity excepted, which history
records. Looked at more closely, he appears therein
merely the heir of Christian interpretation : only,
he knew how to jttstify in a Christian sense (t. e.,
in a nihilistic sense) even the great facts of human
civilisation, which had been repudiated by Christianity,

interpreting them as ways leading to "salvation,"
as early forms of " salvation, " as stimulantia for making

" salvation " requisite . . .



184 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS



22

I take a single instance. Schopenhauer speaks of
beauty with melancholy ardour : what is his ultimate
reason for it ? Because he sees in it a bridge by which

o J

one may get further on, or acquire an incentive to
g-et further on ... He regards it as a momentary
salvation from " will " it allures to everlasting sal
vation . . . He especially praises it as the Saviour from
the " focus of will, " from sexuality, in beauty he
sees the generative impulse negatived . . . Strange
saint ! Somebody contradicts thee, I fear it is nature.
For what end at all is there beauty of tone, colour,
odour and rhythmical motion in nature ? What evolves
the display of beauty ? Fortunately a philosopher con
tradicts him also : no less an authority than divine
Plato (Schopenhauer himself calls him divine) maintains
another thesis : that all beauty incites to procreation,
that this is precisely the proprium of its operation,
from its most sensuous, up to its most intellectual
manifestations . . .

23

Plato goes further. He says, with an innocence for
which one must be Greek and not " Christian ", that
there would be no Platonic philosophy at all, were
there not such handsome youths in Athens ; it was
only the sight of them which put the soul of the



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 185

philosopher into an erotic ecstasy, and gave it no rest
until it had implanted the seed of all high things
in such a fine soil. A strange saint also ! one does
not trust one s ears, even if one trusts Plato. At least,
one surmises that they philosophised differently at
Athens, above all that they philosophised publicly.
Nothing is less Grecian than the conceptual cobweb-
spinning of a recluse, amor intellectualis dci, according
to the mode of Spinoza. Philosophy, according to
Plato s mode, could rather be defined as an erotic
competition, as a further development and an inward-
ising of the old agonistic system of gymnastics, with
its pre-requisites .... What ultimately grew out of
this philosophical erotic of Plato ? A new technical
form of Grecian agon, dialectics. I further call to mind,
in opposition to Schopenhauer and to the honour of
Plato, that the whole of the higher civilisation and
literature of classical France has also grown up on
the soil of sexual interest. One may search every
where in it for gallantry, sensuality, erotic competition,
" woman," one will never search in vain . .



24

L art pour I art. The fighting against the end
in art is always warfare against the moralising
tendency in art, against its subordination to morality.
L art pour I art : that is, " the devil take morality."



I 86 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

But this very hostility betrays the domination of the
prejudice. When the end of the ethical preacher and
improver of mankind has been excluded from art, it
does not at all follow that art in itself is without an
end, without a goal, meaningless ; in short, I art pour
I art a serpent which bites its own tail. " No end at
all, rather than a moral end ! " thus speaks pure
passion. A psychologist, on the other hand, asks,
what does all art do ? does it not praise ? does it
not glorify ? does it not select ? does it not bring into
prominence ? In each of these cases it strengthens or
weakens certain valuations ... Is this only a contingent
matter ? an accident ? something with which the instinct
of the artist would not at all be concerned ? Or rather,
is it not the pre-requisite which enables the artist to
do something ? Is his fundamental instinct directed
towards art ? or is it not rather directed towards the
sense of art, namely, life ? towards a desirableness
of life ? Art is the -great stimulus .to life, _how could
art be understood as purposeless, as aimless, as I art
four I art f A question"~srill~~femains : art makes
manifest also much that is ugly, harsh, and questionable
in life, does it not thereby seem to make life intoler
able ? In fact there have been philosophers who gave
this meaning to it : Schopenhauer taught that the
w^hole purpose of art is " to disengage from will ; " he
honoured it as the great usefulness of tragedy " to
dispose to resignation. "- -This however I have already



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 187

hinted at it is pessimistic optics and the "evil eye :"
one must appeal to artists themselves. What of his
own personality docs the artist communicate to others
in tragedy ? It is not precisely the fearless state of
mind in presence of the frightful and the questionable
which he exhibits ? This state of mind is highly de
sirable in itself ; whoever knows it honours it with
the highest regard. He communicates it, he is obliged
to communicate it, provided he is an artist, a genius
of communication. Bravery and self-possession in
presence of a powerful enemy, an awful calamity,
or a problem which awakens dread it is this tri
umphal condition which the tragic artist selects and
glorifies. In presence of tragedy the martial spirit in
us celebrates its Saturnalia ; he who is accustomed to
affliction, he who seeks affliction heroic man extols
his existence with tragedy,- to him alone the tragic
artist offers the draught of this sweetest cruelty.



To put up with men, to keep open house with
one s heart : that is liberal but it is merely liberal.
We recognise the hearts which are capable of noble
hospitality by the many curtained windows and closed
shutters : they keep their best rooms vacant. Why is
that ? Because they expect guests with whom they
have not to " put up ". . . .



1 88 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

26

We no longer estimate ourselves sufficiently, when
we communicate ourselves. Our true experiences are
not at all loquacious. They could not communicate
themselves, even if they wished. The reason is that
they have not language. We have already got beyond
what we can express in words. In all speaking there
is an inkling of contempt. Language, it seems, has
only been invented for the average, the middling and
the communicative. With speech the speaker has
already vulgarised himself. Extract from Morals for
Deaf-mutes and other philosophers.



" This likeness is charmingly beautiful!" Lite
rary woman, discontented, agitated, desolate in heart
and bowels, ever listening with painful curiosity to the
imperative which whispers out of the depths of her
organisation, " ant liberi aut libri ; " literary wo
man, cultured enough to understand the voice of
nature even when it speaks in Latin, and, on the other
hand, conceited enough and goose enough to speak
secretly with herself in French, " je me verrai, je
me lirai, je m extasierai et je dirai : Possible, que
j aie eu taut d esprit?" . . .



* A quotation from Mozart s opera The Magic Flute.



ROVIXG EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 189

28

The " -impersonal " speak. " Nothing comes easier
to us than to be wise, patient, and superior. We drip
with the oil of forbearance and sympathy, we are just
to the verge of folly, we forgive all. For that very
reason we should keep ourselves somewhat more
strictly disciplined ; for that very reason we should
cultivate in ourselves from time to time a little emotion,
a little emotional vice. It may be hard for us, and
among ourselves, we perhaps laugh at the appearance
we thus present. But what does it matter ! There is
no other method available for conquering ourselves ;
this is our asceticism, our penance "... To become
personal the virtue of the " impersonal "...



29

From a doctor s examination. " What is the task
of all higher instruction ?"- To make man a machine.
" What is the means ? "-He has to learn to be tired.
" How is that attained ? " By the notion of duty. " Who
is his model here ? "- -The philologist : he teaches how
t f a g " Who is the perfect man ? "- The government
official. " What philosophy gives the best formula for
the government official ? " Kant s : the government
official as thing in itself, appointed arbiter over the
government official as phenomenon.



I QO THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS



The right to stupidity. The fatigued and slow-
breathing working man who looks good-humoured and
lets things take their course, this typical figure whom
one meets with in all classes of society in this age of
labour (and of the " Empire ! ), quite claims art for
himself in the present day, including the book, and
above all the journal, how much more beautiful
nature, Italy. The man of the evening, with the
" wild impulses lulled to sleep, " of which Faust speaks,
requires the health resort, the sea coast, the glaciers,
Bayreuth ... In such ages, art has a right to pure
folly, as a sort of vacation-time for intellect, wit, and
humour. That is what Wagner understood. Pure folly
is a restorative .



Another problem of regimen. The expedients
with which Julius Caesar protected himself from sick
ness and headache prodigious marches, the simplest
mode of life, uninterrupted living in the open air,
and constant military exercise are, on the whole,
the measures for maintenance and protection from
extreme liability to injury of that complex machine
working under the highest pressure and called genius.



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN IXOPPORTUXE PHILOSOPHER I Q I

32

The iinmoralist speaks. There is nothing more
distasteful to a philosopher than man in as far as lie
wishes. When the philosopher sees man only in his
doings, when he sees this bravest, most artful, and most
enduring animal, led astray even into labyrinthine
states of trouble, how worthy of admiration does man
appear to him ! The philosopher even furnishes man
with encouragement . . . But he despises wishing man,
" desirable " man also and in general all desir
abilities, all human ideals. If it were possible, a philo
sopher would be a nihilist, because he finds nothing
ness behind all human ideals. Or not even nothing
ness, but only vileness, absurdity, sickness, cowardice,
and fatigue : all sorts of dregs out of the drained
goblet of his own life . . . Man, who, as a reality,
is so worthy of reverence, how is it that he deserves
no respect in so far as he manifests his wishes ? Has
he to do penance for being so accomplished as a
reality ? Has he to compensate for his activity, for
the exertion of thought and will in every activity,
by the stretching of his limbs in the imaginary and
absurd ? The history of his desirabilities has hitherto
been the partie honteuse of man ; one must be careful
not to read too long in it. What justifies man is his
reality, it will for ever justify him. How much more
worthy is actual man, compared with any merely



I CJ2 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

wished, dreamt, or shamelessly falsified man ! compared
with any ideal man whatsoever ... It is only ideal man
that is distasteful to the philosopher.



33

Natural value of egotism. Selfishness has as much
value as the physiological value of him who possesses
it : it may be very valuable, or it may be vile and
contemptible. Each individual may be looked at
with respect to whether he represents an ascending
or a descending line of life. When that is deter
mined, we have a canon for determining the value of
his selfishness. If he represent the ascent of the line
of life, his value is in fact very great and on account
of the collective life which in him makes a further
step, the concern about his maintenance, about provid
ing his optimum of conditions, may even be extreme.
For the single person, the " individual, " as hitherto
understood both popularly and philosophically, is cer
tainly an error : he is nothing " by himself, " no atom,
no " ring of the chain, " nothing merely inherited from
former times, he is the embodiment of the one entire
line of descent up to himself ... If he represent des
cending development, decay, chronic degeneration, or
sickening (diseases, taken on the whole, are pheno
mena which result from decay already present, they
are not the causes of it), he has little worth, and the



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 93

greatest fairness would have him take away as little
as possible from the well-constituted. He is no more
than their parasite then . . .



34

Christian and anarchist. When the anarchist, as
the mouth piece of degenerating strata of society,
demands "justice, " "righteousness" and " equal rights "
with embellished indignation, he is only under the
influence of his lack of civilisation, which prevents
him understanding why he is actually in trouble, in
what respect he is impoverished, that it is in vital
vigour that he is impoverished . . . An impulse to seek
for causes is strong in him : it must be somebody s
fault that he is in a bad condition . . . Even " embel
lished indignation " itself is pleasant to him ; it is an
enjoyment for every poor devil to vilify, it gives a
taste of the ecstasy of power. Even lamenting and
bewailing one s self can give life a charm by which
it becomes tolerable. There is a refined dose of
revenge in every lament ; people reproach those who
are different from them for their own bad condition,
and under certain circumstances even for their wicked
ness, as if it were injustice, as if it involved unper-
mitted privilege. " If I be canaille, thou shouldst be
so also : " it is on the basis of such logic that revolu
tions arise. Bewailing one s self never does any good :

13



1 94 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

it originates from weakness. Whether a person im
putes his bad condition to others, or to himself -the
socialist does the former, and the Christian, for ex
ample, does the latter it makes no essential difference.
That which both cases have in common, let us also
say that which is unworthy in both cases, is that some
body is to be blamed for the suffering in short, that
the sufferer prescribes for himself the honey of revenge
to alleviate his suffering. The objects towards which
this need of revenge, as a need of enjoyment, is directed
are furnished by occasional causes ; the sufferer finds
causes everywhere, which serve to cool his petty
revenge, if he is a Christian, we repeat, he finds the
causes in himself . . . The Christian and the anarchist
both are decadents. But moreover, when the Christian
condemns, calumniates and befouls the " world, " he
does it from the same instinctive motive which impels
the socialistic working man to condemn, calumniate and
befoul society : " doomsday " even is the delicious com
fort of revenge, revolution, the same as the socialistic
working man expects, merely conceived as somewhat
more remote. The " other world " itself what would
be the use of it, if it were not a means for befouling
this world ?

35

Criticism of decadence morality. An " altruistic "
morality, a morality which causes selfishness to lan
guish, is, under all circumstances, a bad sign. This is



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 95

true of the individual, it is especially true of peoples.
The best is wanting, when selfishness begins to be de
ficient. To choose instinctively what is self-injurious, to
be allured by " disinterested " motives, furnishes almost
the formula for decadence. " Not to seek one s own
advantage : " that is merely the moral fig-leaf for quite a
different thing, for the physiological fact, " one does not
know any longer how to find one s own advantage "...
Disgregation of instincts ! It is at an end with
him when man becomes altruistic. Instead of naively
saying, " / am no longer of any account," the moral
falsehood in the mouth of the decadent says, " nothing
is of any account, life is of no account" . . . Such
an opinion is ultimately a great danger ; it is con
tagious, soon growing up luxuriantly to a tropical
vegetation of ideas on the whole morbid soil of
society, at one time as a religion (Christianity), at another
time as a philosophy (Schopenhauerity). Under certain
circumstances such upas-tree vegetation, grown out
of corruption, poisons life with its far-reaching
emanations for millenniums .



36

Morality for physicians. The sick are parasites of
society. In certain conditions it is improper to live
any longer. The continued vegetating in cowardly
dependence on physicians and prescriptions after the

13*



196 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

meaning" of life, the rigJit to life, has been lost, should
entail the profound contempt of society. The physicians,
on the other hand, would have to be agents for com
municating this contempt, not recipes for their patients,
but every day a new dose of aversion from them . . .
To create a new responsibility, the physician s respon
sibility, for all cases where the highest interest of
life, of ascending life, requires the remorseless crushing
down and thrusting aside of degenerating life for
example, for the right to procreation, for the right to
be born, for the right to live . . . To die proudly
when it is no longer possible to live proudly Death
selected voluntarily, death at the right time, consum
mated with brightness and cheerfulness in the midst of
children and witnesses : so that an actual leave-taking
is possible where he is yet present who takes his
leave, as also an actual appraisement of what has been
realised and aspired after, a summing up of life all
in opposition to the pitiable and horrifying comedy
which Christianity has practised with the hour of dying.
We must never forgive Christianity for having taken
advantage of the weakness of the dying to outrage
their consciences, for having misused even the mode
of death to arrive at valuations of men and of the
past Here, in spite of all cowardice of prejudice, it is
primarily a question of re-establishing the correct
evaluation, t. e., physiological evaluation, of so-called
natural death, which, in the end, is nothing but an



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 97

unnatural death, a suicide. One is never destroyed by
any one but one s self. But natural death is a death under
the most contemptible conditions, involuntary death,
death at the wrong time, a coward s death. Out of
love of life we should desire a different kind of death
* voluntary, conscious, not accidental or by surprise . . .
Finally, an advice to Messrs, the pessimists and
other decadents. We have not it at our disposal to
prevent being born ; we can, however, rectify this
error for it is sometimes an error. When some one
does away with himself, he does the noblest thing in
the world ; by so doing he has almost entitled himself
to live . . . Society what am I saying ! life itself, is
more advantaged thereby, than by any "life" of re
nunciation, ansemia, or other virtue, one has freed
others from one s presence, one has removed an objection
to life . . . Pessimism, pur, verf, only proves itself by
the self-refutation of Messrs, the pessimists : one
must go a step further with one s logic, and not.
merely negative life with " Will and Representation, "
as Schopenhauer did, one must, in the first place,
negative Schopenhauer . . . Pessimism, let us say in
passing, notwithstanding its contagiousness, does not
on the whole increase the infirmity of an age or
race : it is the expression of infirmity. One succumbs
to it as one succumbs to cholera ; one has to be
morbidly enough disposed for it. Pessimism itself
does not make a single additional decadent ; I call



198 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

to mind the result of the statistics, that the years in
which the cholera rages do not differ from the other
years in the total number of deaths.



37

Whether we are become more moral. As was to
be expected, the whole ferocity of moral stupefaction,
which avowedly passes for morality itself in Germany,
has taken up arms against my conception, " beyond
good and evil : " I could tell fine stories about it. My
critics above all gave me the " undeniable superiority "
of the moral sentiment of our age to reflect upon,
the actual progress we have made in this respect ; in
comparison with us, a Caesar Borgia was on no ac
count to be set up in my fashion as a "higher man,"
as a kind of bcyond-man. A Swiss editor, of the
"Bund," went so far (not without expressing his
esteem of the courage for such a jeopardy) as to
" understand " the meaning of my work to the
effect that I proposed to do away with all decent
sentiment. Very much obliged ! I permit myself,
as an answer, to raise the question, whether we are
really become more moral. That all the world believes
it is already an objection against it ... We modern
men, very delicate, very readily injured, giving and
taking consideration in a hundred ways, we conceit
ourselves in fact that this delicate humanity which we



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER I 99

manifest, this realised unanimity in forbearance, in
helpfulness, and in mutual trust is positive progress,
and that we are thereby far above the men of the
Renaissance. Every age, however, thinks in this
manner, it is obliged to think thus. It is certain we
could not place ourselves in Renaissance conditions ;
we could not even conceive ourselves placed in them :
our nerves would not stand that reality, not to speak
of our muscles. No progress, however, is demonstrated
by this incapacity, but only a different, a later con
dition, weaker, tenderer, and more readily injured, out
of which a considerate morality necessarily evolves.
If we were to think of our tenderness and lateness,
our physiological aging, as absent, our "humanising"
morality also would forthwith lose its value (no mor
ality has value in itself) ; it would even let us despise
it. Let us not doubt, on the other hand, that we
modern men, with our thick wadded humanity, which
will not by any means strike against a stone, would
furnish a comedy to the contemporaries of Ceesar
Borgia to laugh themselves to death over. In fact
we are extraordinarily amusing, though involuntarily,
with our modern " virtues" . . . The decline of hostile
and distrust- awakening instincts for that would be
our " progress " represents only one of the conse
quences in the general decline of vitality : it costs
a hundred times more pains and more foresight to
effectuate an existence so conditioned and so late.



2OO THE TWILIGHT^OF THE IDOLS

Under such circumstances people mutually assist one
another ; to a certain extent everybody is sick,
and everybody is a sick-nurse. That condition of
things is then denominated " virtue : " among men
who knew a different mode of life, fuller, more
prodigal, more profuse, it would have had a different
name, perhaps " cowardice, " " pitiableness, " or " old
woman s morality" . . . Our softening of manners
that is my thesis, it is, if you will, my innovation
is a consequence of decadence ; severity, frightfulness
of manners may, inversely, be a consequence of super
abundance of life : for then much can be dared, much
can be challenged, and much also can be squandered.
What was formerly a seasoning of life would be poison
to us ... To be indifferent that also is a form of
strength for that likewise we are too old and too late :
our morality of sympathy against which I w r as the first
to give warning, that which one might designate as
rimpressionisme morale, is a further expression of the
physiological over-excitability possessed by all that is
decadent. That movement which has attempted to
introduce itself scientifically by means of Schopenhauer s
morality of sympathy a very unfortunate attempt !
is the true decadence movement in morals, and, as such,
is intrinsically related to Christian morality. Vigorous
eras, noble civilisations, see something contemptible in
sympathy, in " brotherly love, " in the lack of self-asser
tion and self-reliance. Eras are to be measured by



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2OI

their positive powers : the period of the Renaissance
accordingly, so profuse and fateful, presents itself as
the last great period ; and we modern men, with our
anxious self-nursing and brotherly love, with our virtues
of labour, unpretentiousness, fair play, and scientific
spirit accumulating, economic, mechanical, we re
present a weak period . . . Our virtues are determined,
are peremptorily called forth by our weakness . . .
" Equality, " as an actual approximation to similarity,
of which the theory of " equal rights " is but the ex
pression, belongs essentially to decadence : the gap
between man and man, between class and class, the
multiplicity of types, the will to assert itself, to stand
out in contrast, that which I call pathos of distance
belongs to every vigorous period. The power of stretch,
the width of stretch between the extremes, becomes
always smaller at present, the extremes themselves
finally merge into similarity. All our political theories
and state constitutions, the " German Empire " by no
means excepted, are consequences, resulting necessities,
of decadence ; the unconscious operation of decadence
has gained the ascendency so far as to affect the
ideals of some of the sciences. My objection against
the whole of the sociology of England and France is
that it only knows decaying types of society by ex
perience, and quite innocently takes its own instincts
of decay as the standard for sociological valuations.
Deteriorating life, the decline of all organising power



2O2 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

(i. e., separating, gap-making, subordinating and super-
ordinating power) is formulated as the ideal, in the socio
logy of the present day. Our socialists are decadents ;
Mr. Herbert Spencer, ho\vever, is also a decadent,
he sees something desirable in the triumph of altruism.



38

My concept of freedom. The worth of a thing
lies sometimes not in what one attains with it, but in
what one pays for it, wliat it costs us. I give an ex
ample. Liberal institutions immediately cease to be
liberal, so soon as they are attained ; afterwards, there
are no more mischievous or more radical enemies of
freedom than liberal institutions. One knows well
enough what they accomplish : they undermine the
will to power, they are the levelling of mountain and
valley exalted into morality, they make people small,
cowardly, and voluptuous, with them the herding
animal always triumphs. Liberalism : that is in
creased herding-animality . . . The same institutions
produce quite other results so long as they are fought
for ; they then, in fact, further freedom in a powerful
manner. On looking more accurately, we see that it
is warfare which produces these results, warfare for
liberal institutions, which, as war, allows illiberal in
stincts to continue. And warfare educates for freedom.
For what is freedom ? To have the will to be respon-



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 203

sible for one s self. To keep the distance which separates
us. To become more indifferent to hardship, severity,
privation, and even to life. To be ready to sacrifice
men for one s cause, one s self not excepted. Freedom
implies that manly instincts, instincts which delight
in war and triumph, dominate over other instincts ;
for example over the instincts of " happiness. " The
man who has become free, how much more the spirit
which has become free, treads under foot the con
temptible species of well-being dreamt of by shop
keepers, Christians, cows, women, Englishmen, and
other democrats. The free man is a warrior. How
is freedom measured, in individuals, as well as in
nations ? By the resistance which has to be overcome,
by the effort which it costs to retain superiority. We
should have to seek the highest type of free men
where the highest resistance is constantly overcome :
five paces from tyranny, close on the threshold of
the danger of thraldom. This is psychologiciilly true,
when we mean by " tyrants " pitiless and frightful
instincts, which peremptorily call forth the maximum
of authority and discipline the finest type is furnished
by Julius Caesar ; it is also politically true let us but
traverse the course of history. The people who were
worth something, who became worth something, never
acquired their greatness under liberal institutions :
great danger made something out of them which de
serves reverence, danger which first teaches us to



2O4 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

know our resources, our virtues, our shield and sword,
our genius, which compels us to be strong . . . First
principle : men must require strength ; otherwise, they
never attain it. Those great forcing-houses for the
strong, the strongest species of man that has hitherto
existed, the aristocratic commonwealths of the pattern
of Rome and Venice, understood freedom precisely
in the sense in which I understand the word : as
something which one has and has not, as something
which one desires, which one wins by conquest . . .



39

Criticism of modernism. Our institutions are no
longer worth anything : that is a matter on which we
are unanimous. But the fault is not in the institutions,
but in us. After we have lost all instincts out of
which institutions grow, the institutions themselves are
being lost, because we are no longer suitable for them.
Democratism has always been the decadence type of
organising power : I have already (Human, All-too-
human, Vol. I., Aphorism 472) characterised modern de
mocracy (together with its incomplete forms, such as
the " German Empire ") as a declining type of the
state. In order that there may be institutions, there
must be a species of will, instinct, or imperative, anti-
liberal even to malignity : a will for tradition, for au
thority, for responsibility throughout centuries, a will



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 05

for the solidarity of chains of generations forward and
backward in infinitum. When this will exists, some
thing establishes itself like the Imperium Romanum ;
or like Russia, the only power at present which has
durability in its constitution, wilich can wait, and can
yet promise something, Russia, the antithetical con
ception to the pitiable European petty-state-misery and
nervousness, which has got into a critical condition
with the establishment of the German Empire . . . The
entire western world no longer possesses those in
stincts out of which institutions grow, out of which
futurity grows ; perhaps nothing is so much against
the grain of its " modern spirit. " We live for the
present, we live very fast, we live very irresponsibly :
this is precisely what we call " freedom. " That which
makes institutions in reality is despised, hated, and
repudiated : wherever the word " authority " even be
comes audible, people believe themselves in danger of
a new slavery. Decadence goes so far in the appre
ciative instinct of our politicians and political parties,
that they prefer instinctively what disintegrates, what
hastens the end . . . Witness modern marriage. All
rationality has evidently been lost in modern marriage ;
that does not however furnish an objection against
marriage, but against modernism. Rationality of mar
riage it lay in the sole legal responsibility of the
husband : marriage thus possessed gravity, while at
present it halts on both legs. Rationality of mar-



2C)6 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

riage it lay in its indissolubleness on principle : it
thus acquired an emphasis which, opposed to the
accident of sentiment, passion, and momentary impulse,
knew how to make itself heard. Rationality of mar
riage it lay likewise in the responsibility of families
for the selection of the spouses. By the increasing
indulgence in favour of marriages for love, the basis
of marriage, that which first of all makes it an insti
tution, has been almost eliminated. An institution is
never, and never will be founded on an idiosyn
crasy : marriage, as we have said, cannot be founded
on " love, " it is founded on sexual impulse, on the
impulse to possess property (woman and child as
property), on the impulse to rule, which constantly
organises for itself the smallest type of sovereignly
(family), which needs children and heirs to maintain
physiologically an acquired measure of power, influence
and riches, to prepare for long tasks, and for instinct-
solidarity from one century to another. Marriage, as
an institution, already involves the affirmation of the
greatest and most permanent form of organisation :
if society cannot as a whole pledge itself to the re
motest generations, marriage has no meaning at all.
Modern marriage has lost its meaning, consequently,
it is being done away with.



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 07

4

The labour question. The fact that there is a
labour question is owing to stupidity, or, at bottom,
instinct-degeneration, which is the cause of all existing
stupidity. Regarding certain things one does not
question : the first imperative of instinct. I do not at
all understand what people want to do with the Euro
pean working man, now that they have made a question
of him. He finds himself far too advantageously situa
ted not to go on questioning further, ever less mo
destly. He has at last the majority on his side. There
is no hope now that a modest and self-contented
species of human being, a type like the Chinese, will
here constitute itself into a class : this would have
been the rational course, this would have been almost
a necessity. But what have people done ? Everything
possible to annihilate even the germ of the pre-requisite
for such a course ; through the most unjustifiable
thoughtlessness people have fundamentally destroyed
the instincts in virtue of which the working man
becomes possible as a class, possible for himself. The
working man has been made capable of military ser
vice, he has been given the right of combination and
the right of the franchise : no wonder he already feels
his existence as a state of exigency (morally expressed,
as injustice). But what do people want ? let it be
asked once more. If they want to realise an end,



2O8 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

they must also be willing to use the means : if they
want to have slaves, it is foolish to educate them to
be masters.



" Freedom w r hich I do not mean * ..." In such
times as the present, it is an additional peril to be
left to one s instincts. These instincts mutually contra
dict, disturb, and destroy themselves ; I have already
defined modernism as physiological self-contradiction.
A rational education would claim that one, at least,
of those instinct-systems should be paralysed under
an iron pressure, to enable another system to attain
power, to become strong and predominant . . At pre
sent one would have to make the individual possible
in the first place, by pruning him. To make him
possible, that is to say, to make him an entirety . . .
The very reverse happens : independence, free deve
lopment, and laisscr-aller are claimed the most vehe
mently precisely by those for whom no restraint would
be too severe this is true in politics, it is true in art.
But that is a symptom of decadence : our modern
notion of " freedom " is an additional proof of dege
neration of instinct.



* An allusion to Max von Schenkendorf s poem : Freiheit, die
ich meine.



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2OQ

42

Where belief is necessary. Nothing is rarer among
moralists and saints than rectitude ; perhaps they say
the contrary, perhaps they even believe it. For when
a belief is more useful, more efficacious, and more
convincing than conscious hypocrisy, owing to instinct,
hypocrisy forthwith becomes innocence : first propo
sition for understanding great saints. Among philoso
phers also, another species of saints, the whole busi
ness involves the necessity of only admitting certain
truths, namely those on the basis of which their busi
ness has public sanction, in Kantian language, the
truths of practical reason. They know what they must
prove, they are practical therein, they recognise one
another by being in mutual agreement with regard
to "truths." "Thou shalt not lie" i. e., Mr. Philosopher,
be on your guard, lest you speak the truth . . .



43

Whispered into the ear of the conservatives. What
people did not know before, what they now know,
or might know, a retrogression, a return in any sense,
or to any extent, is quite impossible. We physiologists,
at least, know that. But all priests and moralists
have believed it possible, they wanted to bring
mankind back, to screw mankind down to an earlier

14



210 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

standard of virtue. Morality has always been a
Procrustes-bed. Politicians even have imitated the
preachers of virtue in this respect ; at present also,
there are parties who dream of the crabs-march of
everything, as the final goal. No one, however, is at
liberty to be a crab. There is no help for it : we are
obliged to go forward, that is to say, step by step
onwards in decadence (this is my definition of modern
" progress " . . .) We can check this development, and
by checking it, we can dam up and collect dege
neration itself, making it more vehement and sudden ;
we cannot do more.

44

My notion of genius. Great men, like great pe
riods, are explosive materials in which an immense
force is accumulated ; it is always pre-requisite for such
men, historically and physiologically, that for a long
period there has been a collecting, a heaping up, an
economising, and a hoarding, with respect to them,
that for a long time no explosion has taken place.
When the tension in the substance has become too
great, the most accidental stimulus suffices to call
into the world the " genius," the " deed," and grand
destiny. Of what consequence then is the environ
ment, the epoch, the "spirit of the age," or "public
opinion ! " Let us take the case of Napoleon. The
France of the Revolution (and still more pre-revo-



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 211

lutionary France) would have produced a type anti
thetical to Napoleon : it did produce it. And because
Napoleon was of a different type, the heir of a
stronger, more enduring and older civilisation than
that which vanished into vapour and fragments in
France, he became master, he alone was the master
here. The great men are necessary, the time when
they appear is contingent ; that they almost always
become masters of their age, just depends on the fact
that they are stronger, older, and possess longer accu
mulated forces. Between a genius and his age there
exists a relation like that between the strong and the
weak, between the old and the young : the age is,
relatively, always much younger, more slender, more
immature, more unassured, and more childish. That
people at present think very differently concerning
this matter in France (and in Germany also, but that
is of no consequence), that the theory of the milieu,
a true neuropathic theory, has there become sacrosanct
and almost scientific, finding belief even among phy
siologists that "has a bad odour," it gives one melan
choly thoughts. In England also, the thing is under
stood in the very same manner ; but nobody will fret
about that. There are only two ways in which an
Englishman can account for a genius or " great man : "
either democratically in the manner of Buckle, or re
ligiously in the manner of Carlyle. The peril involved
in great men and great ages is excessive ; exhaustion

14*



2 I 2 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

of every kind and sterility follow in their footsteps.
The great man is a close ; the great period, the Re
naissance, for example, is a close. The genius in
work, in deed is necessarily a squanderer ; his great
ness is that lie expends himself. The instinct of
self-preservation is, as it were, out of gear in the ge
nius ; the over-powerful pressure of the outflow of his
energies forbids all such care and foresight. People
call this " sacrifice," they praise the heroism of genius,
his indifference to his own welfare, his devotion to
an idea, to a great cause, or to his country : it is
all misunderstanding however . . . He outflows, he
overflows, he uses himself up, he does not spare him
self fatefully, portentously, involuntarily, as a river
involuntarily overflows its banks. But because people
owe much to such explosives they have, on the
other hand, bestowed much upon them ; for example,
a sort of higlicr morality . . . For that is the mode
of human gratitude : it misunderstands its benefactors.



45

The criminal and those related to him. The cri
minal type that is the type of the strong man under
unfavourable conditions, a strong man who has been
made sick. He lacks the wilderness, a certain freer
and more dangerous environment, and mode of being,
in which all that is offensive and defensive in his in-



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 I 3

stincts exists by right. His virtiies are put in ban
by society ; the most lively impulses instinctive to
him become forthwith interwoven with depressing
emotions, with suspicion, fear, and disgrace. But this
is almost the recipe for producing physiological de
generation. He who, with prolonged suspense, fore
sight, and cunning, has to do secretly what he can
best do, what he would most readily do, becomes
anaemic ; and because he gains nothing but danger,
persecution, and calamity through his instincts, his
sentiment towards them quite alters : he regards them
as fatalistic. It is society, our domesticated, mediocre,
emasculated society, in which a man with his natural
forces unimpaired, coming from the mountains or from
sea-faring adventures, necessarily degenerates into a
criminal. Or almost necessarily ; for there are cases
in which such a man proves himself stronger than
society : the Corsican Napoleon is the most cele
brated case. For the problem before us, the testimony
of Dostoiewsky is of importance Dostoiewsky, the
only psychologist, let it be said, from whom I had
anything to learn ; he belongs to the happiest chance
incidents of my life, still more even than the discover
ing of Stendhal. This profound man, who was ten
times right to depreciate the superficial Germans, has
perceived that the Siberian convicts, in whose midst
he lived for a long time (capital criminals for whom
there was no return to society), were quite other than



2 I 4 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

he himself expected, persons carved almost out of
the best, the hardest and the most valuable material to
be found in the Russian dominions. Let us generalise
the case of the criminal : let us realise the disposition
of persons, who, from any cause whatsoever, lack public
approbation, who know that they are not regarded as
salutary and serviceable to society, that Chandala
feeling of being counted inferior, outcast, unworthy,
and defiling. All such natures have the colour of
the subterranean, in their thoughts and actions ;
everything in them becomes paler than in those
on whose existence daylight rests. But almost all
modes of existence which we at present signalise,
have formerly lived in this semi - sepulchral atmo
sphere, the scientific man of character, the artist,
the genius, the free spirit, the actor, the merchant,
the great discoverer . . . As long as the priest passed
for the highest type, every meritorious variety of
human being was depreciated . . . The time is coming
I promise it when the priest will be regarded as the
lowest type, as our Chandala, as the most mendacious,
the most disreputable variety of human being ... I
direct attention to the fact that even at present (under the
mildest sway of custom that has ever existed on earth,
at least in Europe), every mode of separateness, every
protracted, all-too-protracted condition of subter position,
every unusual, non-transparent mode of existence, ap
proximates men to the type of which the criminal is the



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 I 5

climax. All intellectual innovators have, for a time,
the pale and portentous sign of the Chandala on their
foreheads ; not because they should be felt as such,
but because they themselves are sensible of the fright
ful gulf which separates them from everything tra
ditional and honourable. Almost every genius knows
the " Catilinarian existence " as one of his developments,
a hateful, revengeful, insurrectionary feeling against
everything which already is, which does not any
longer become . . . Catiline the pre-existent form of
every Caesar.

4 6

Here the prospect is open. It may be loftiness of
soul when a philosopher is silent ; it may be love
when he contradicts himself; in a knowing one a court
esy which speaks falsely is possible. It has been said
not without acuteness : il est indigne des grands c&urs
de repandre le trouble qu ils ressentent ; only, one has
to add that it may likewise be greatness of soul to
have no fear of the meanest things. A woman who
loves sacrifices her honour ; a knowing one who
" loves " perhaps sacrifices his humanity ; a God who
loved became a Jew . . .

47

Beauty no accident. Even the beauty of a race
or family, the pleasantness and kindness of their
whole demeanour, is acquired by effort ; like genius,



2l6 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

it is the final result of the accumulated labour of
generations. There must have been great sacrifices
made to good taste ; for the sake of it, much must
have been done, and much refrained from the seven
teenth century in France is worthy of admiration in
both ways ; good taste must then have been a principle
of selection, for society, place, dress, and sexual grati
fication : beauty must have been preferred to advan
tage, habit, opinion, indolence. Supreme rule : we
must not " let ourselves go, " even when only in
our own presence. Good things are costly beyond
measure, and the rule always holds, that he who
possesses them is other than he who acquires them.
All excellence is inheritance ; what has not been in
herited is imperfect, it is a beginning . . . At Athens
in the time of Cicero, who expresses his surprise with
regard to it, men and youths were far superior to
women in beauty : but what labour and effort in the
service of beauty had the Athenian males required of
themselves for centuries ! We must not make a
mistake here with regard to method : the mere rearing
of feelings and thoughts is almost valueless (it is here
that German culture, which is entirely illusory, makes
its great mistake) ; we have first to persuade the body.
The strict maintenance of significant and select de
meanour, an obligation to live only with those who do
not "let themselves go," suffices perfectly for becom
ing significant and select ; in two or three generations



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 I 7

everything has become inwardised. It is decisive for
the fortune of a people and of humanity, that civili
sation begin at the right place not at "soul" (as
was the baneful superstition of priests and semi-
priests) ; the right place is body, demeanour, regimen,
physiology ; the rest follows therefrom. It is on that
account that the Greeks are the leading event in the
history of civilisation : they knew, they did what was
necessary ; Christianity, which despised the body, has
hitherto been the greatest misfortune for the human
race.

48

Progress as I understand it. I also speak of a " re
turn to nature," although it is not properly a going
back, but a going up up into high, free, and even
frightful nature and naturalness, such as plays, or may
play, with great tasks ... To express it in a simile,
Napoleon was an instance of a " return to nature,"
as I understand it (for example, in rebus tacticis, and
still more in strategy, as military men are aware).
But Rousseau where did he really want to return to ?
Rousseau, that first modern man, idealist and canaille
in one person ; needing moral " dignity " to endure his
own aspect ; sick with wanton conceit and wanton
self-contempt ! And even this abortion, which de
posited itself on the threshold of the modern age,
wanted " return to nature " where, let us ask again, did



2l8 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

Rousseau want to return to ? Ihate Rousseau, hate
him in the Revolution itself: it is the grand historical
expression of this dualism of idealist and canaille.
The bloody farce with which that revolution played
itself out, its " immorality," is of little account to me ;
what I hate is its Rousseau-w#ra/z ^y the so-called
" truths " of the revolution with which it operates to
the present day, and wins over to itself all the shallow
and mediocre. The doctrine of equality ! . . . But
there exists no deadlier poison ; for it seems to be
preached by justice itself, while it does away \vith
justice ... " Equality to the equal, inequality to
the unequal" that would be the true teaching of
justice ; and the corollary likewise, " Never make the
unequal equal."- That such dreadful and bloody events
happened around the doctrine of equality, has given a
sort of glory and luridness to this "modern idea"
par excellence : so that the revolution as a spectacle
has seduced even the noblest minds. That is, after
all, no reason for esteeming it any higher. I see only
one who regarded it as it must be regarded, with
disgust Gee the . . .

49

Gee the. No mere German event, but a European
event ; a grand attempt to surmount the eighteenth
century, by a return to nature, by an ascension to the
naturalness of the Renaissance, a kind of self-sur-



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AN INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 2 I 9

mounting on the part of that century. He possessed
its strongest instincts : its sentimentality, its nature
worship, its tendencies anti-historic, idealistic, unreal, and
revolutionary (the last is only a form of the unreal).
He called to his aid history, science, antiquity, and like
wise Spinoza, but above all practical activity ; he en
circled himself with nothing but denned horizons ; he
did not sever himself from life, but placed himself in
it ; he was not desponding, and took as much as
possible on himself, over himself, and into himself.
What he aspired to was totality ; he struggled against
the severance of reason, sensuousness, emotion and
\vill (preached in the most forbidding scholasticism
by Kant, the antipode of Goethe), he disciplined him
self to entirety, he created himself . . . Goethe was a
convinced realist in the midst of an age disposed to
the unreal ; he was affirmative of everything analogous
to himself in this respect, he had no more important
experience than that ens realissimum named Napoleon.
Gcethe conceived of a personality robust and high-
cultured, skilful in all physical accomplishments, keeping
himself in check, and maintaining his self-reverence,
who dares to allow himself the whole realm and riches
of naturalness, and is strong enough for that freedom ;
the man of toleration, not out of weakness, but out
of strength, because he knows how to use advant
ageously what would cause the ruin of average con
stitutions ; the man to whom there is nothing pro-



22O THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

hibited unless it be weakness, whether it is designated
vice or virtue ... A mind thus emancipated, stands
with a cheerful and confident fatalism in the midst of
the universe, in the belief that only the single thing is
rejectable, that, on the whole, everything is saved and
maintained : he no longer denies . . . But such a be
lief is the highest of all possible beliefs : I have
christened it with the name of Dionysos



50

We might say that, in a certain sense, the nine
teenth century has likewise aspired after all that
Gcethe himself aspired after : universality in under
standing and approving, a quiet reserve towards every
thing, an audacious realism, and reverence for all
matters of fact. How is it that the sum total is no
Gcethe, but a chaos, a nihilistic groaning, a grievous
uncertainty as to whence and whither, an instinctive
weariness which in praxi impels men continually to
hark back to the eighteenth century ? (For example, as
emotional Romanticism, as altruism, as hyper-sentiment
ality, as femininism in taste, and as socialism in politics.)
Is not the nineteenth century, especially at its close,
merely a strengthened and brutalised eighteenth
century, i. e., a decadence century ? So that Gcethe
would have been merely an episode, a splendid, vain
effort, not only for Germany, but for Europe as a



ROVING EXPEDITIONS OF AX INOPPORTUNE PHILOSOPHER 22 I

whole? But we misunderstand great men when we
look at them from the narrow perspective of public
utility. That we do not know how to derive ad
vantage from them that itself perhaps belongs to
greatness . . .



Gcethe is the last German for whom I have re
verence ; he would have felt three things which I feel,
we also understand one another with regard to the
" cross. "... People often ask me why in the world I
write in German : I have been nowhere less read than
in my own country. But who knows, after all, if I even
want to be read at present ? To create things on which
time vainly tries its teeth ; as regards form, as regards
substance, to make an effort after a little immortality.
I was never yet modest enough to require less of
myself. Aphorism and the sentence, in which I, as
the foremost among the Germans, am master, are the
forms of " eternity ; " my ambition is to say in ten
sentences what every one else says in a book, what
every one else does not say in a book . . .

I have given to mankind the profoundest book it
possesses, my Zarathitstra : I shall shortly give it the
most independent one.



MY INDEBTEDNESS TO THE ANCIENTS



A word in conclusion with regard to that world
to which I have sought access, to which I have per
haps found a new entrance, the ancient w r orld. My
taste, which may be the contrary of a tolerant taste, is
here, as in other cases, far from making an uncon
ditional affirmation : on the whole, it does not readily
say yea ; it rather prefers nay ; it likes best of all to
say nothing whatever . . . This applies to entire civili
sations, it applies to books, it applies also to places
and landscapes. After all it is only a very small
number of ancient books that count in my life ; the
most celebrated ones are not among them. My sense
for style, for the epigram as style, awakened almost
instantaneously on coming in contact with Sallust I
have not forgotten the astonishment of my venerated
teacher Corssen, when he had to give the highest
number of marks to his worst Latin scholar, I had
done all at once. Compressed, rigid, with as much



MY INDEBTEDNESS TO THE ANCIENTS 223

substance as possible in the back-ground, a cool malice
against "fine words" and "fine sentiment" also, I
therewith found my vein. In my writings, up to my
Zarathustra, a very strenuous ambition to attain the
Roman style, the " (Ere perennius in style will be
recognised. It was the same with me on my first
contact with Horace. Up to the present, I have not
received from any poet the same artistic rapture as was
given to me from the first by an Horatian ode. In
certain languages that which is attained there cannot
even be willed. That lingual mosaic where every
word, as sound, as position, and as notion, diffuses its
force right, left, and over the whole, that minimum
in the compass and number of signs, that maximum
thus realised in their energy, all that is Roman, and,
if you will believe me, it is noble par excellence. All
other poetry becomes somewhat too popular in com
parison with it, mere sentimental loquacity.



I am not at all under obligation to the Greeks
for any similarly strong impressions, and, to speak out
candidly, they cannot be to us what the Romans are.
We do not learn from the Greeks : their mode is too
foreign, it is also too unstable to operate imperatively
or " classically. " Who would ever have learned to
write from a Greek ! Who would ever have learned it



224 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

without the Romans ! . . . Plato need not be brought
forward as an objection to me. With respect to Plato,
I am a thorough sceptic, and I have always been unable
to assent to the admiration of Plato the artist, which is
traditional among scholars. After all, I have here the
most refined judges of taste among the ancients them
selves on my side. Plato, as it seems to me, jumbles
together all the forms of style ; he is thus a first
decadent in style : he has something on his con
science like what the Cynics have who discovered
the satura Menippea. To be operated upon by the
Platonic dialogue that shockingly self-complacent and
childish kind of dialectics, a person must never have
read good French literature, Fontenelle, for example.
Plato is tiresome. In the end my distrust of Plato
goes deeper than the surface : I find him strayed so
far from all fundamental instincts of the Hellenes, so
mismoralised, so pre-existently Christian (he has already
the concept " good " as the highest concept), that I
should prefer to employ the hard expression, " superior
cheatery, " with reference to the whole phenomenon
of Plato (or, if people like it better, idealism), rather
than any other term. People have paid dearly for
this Athenian s going to school with the Egyptians
(or with the Jews in Egypt ? . .). In the great fatality
of Christianity, Plato is the ambiguity and fascination
called the " ideal, " which made it possible for the
nobler minds of antiquity to misunderstand themselves,



MY INDEBTEDNESS TO THE ANCIENTS 225

and enter on the bridge which led to the " cross "...
And how much of Plato is still in the concept of
" Church, " in the organisation, system, and practice of
the Church! My recreation, my predilection, my cure
from all Platonism, has always been Thucydides. Thucy
dides and perhaps Macchiavelli s Principe are nearest
akin to me in the unconditioned will to impose nothing
on themselves, and in their determination to see the
rational in reality, not in "reason," and still less in
" morality "... There is no better corrective than
Thucydides of the pitiable tendency to beautify the
Greeks in the direction of the ideal, a tendency which
the youth " trained in humanities " carries away with
him into life as the reward of his public-school drilling.
One has to turn his writings over line by line, and
read his mental reserve as distinctly as his words :
there are few thinkers so rich in mental reserve.
Sophist civilisation, I mean to say realist civilisation,
attains its most perfect expression in Thucydides :
that inestimable movement in the midst of the moral
and ideal cheatery of the Socratic Schools, which, just
then, was breaking out everywhere. Greek philo
sophy as the decadence of Greek instinct ; Thucydides
as the great sum, the last revelation of that strong,
stern, hard matter-of-factness, which was instinctive
in the older Hellenes. Courage in presence of reality
distinguishes in the end such natures as Thucydides
from Plato : Plato is a coward in presence of



226 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

reality, consequently he takes refuge in the ideal ;
Thucy elides is master of himself, consequently he
maintains power also over things . . .



3

To scent out " beautiful souls, " " golden medio
crities, " and other perfections in the Greeks, perhaps
to admire in them the repose in grandeur, the ideal
disposition, lofty simplicity from this " lofty sim
plicity " (a niaiserie allemande in the end), I was
preserved by the psychologist implanted in my nature.
I saw their strongest instinct, the will to power, I saw
them quake in presence of the intractable force of this
impulse, I saw all their institutions evolve out of pro
tective measures to secure themselves mutually from
their innate explosive material. The enormous internal
tension then discharged itself externally, in dreadful
and reckless hostility : the city communities lacerated
themselves in conflict with one another, in order that
the citizens of each might find peace within themselves.
People required to be strong ; danger was close at
hand, it lurked everywhere. The magnificently supple
physique, the daring realism and immoralism which
belonged to the Hellene, were an exigency, not a
" temperament. " These qualities only came in course
of time, they were not there from the beginning.
And the Greeks desired naught else but to feel them-



MY INDEBTEDNESS TO THE AXCIEXTS 22 7

selves dominant, to show themselves dominant with
their festivals and arts : these things were expedients
for self-glorification, under certain circumstances for
inspiring terror ... To judge the Greeks by their philo
sophers in the German manner, to avail one s self per
chance of the affected virtuousness of the Socratic
Schools for disclosures as to what is fundamentally
Hellenic ! . . . For the philosophers are the decadents of
Grecianism, the counter-movement against ancient, noble
taste (against the agonal instinct, against the polis,
against the worth of the race, against the authority
of tradition). Socratic virtues were preached because
they had been lost by the Greeks : excitable, timid,
fickle, all of them comedians, they had a few reasons
too many for allowing morality to be preached to
them. Not that it helped, but great words and attitudes
suit decadents so well . .



4

I was the first for the purpose of understanding
the older, still copious, and even overflowing Hellenic
instinct, to take seriously that wonderful phenomenon
which bears the name of Dionysos : it is only ex
plainable by a surplus of energy. Whoever had
devoted his attention to the Greeks, like that pro-
foundest student of their civilisation at present living,
Jacob Burckhardt of Bale, was at once aware that

15*



228 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

something has been achieved thereby : Burckhardt
inserted a special chapter into his " Kultur der
G rice /i en " on the phenomenon referred to. If one
wants the contrast one may look at the almost ex
hilarating poverty of instinct in German philologists,
when they come into proximity with the Dionysian.
The celebrated Lobeck especially, who, with the vener
able assurance of a worm dried up between books,
crept into this world of mysterious conditions, and, by
being frivolous and childish ad nauseam, persuaded
himself that he was scientific, Lobeck, with great
display of learning, has given to understand that it is
really no matter about all these curiosities. In fact,
the priests might have communicated some not unim
portant information to those who took part in such
orgies ; for example, that wine excites lust, that under
certain circumstances man lives on fruit, that plants
blossom in spring and wither in autumn. As regards
that strange wealth of rites, symbols, and myths of
orgiastic origin with which the ancient world is literally
overgrown, Lobeck finds in it an occasion to become
a trifle more ingenious. " The Greeks, " he says (Agla-
ophamns I. 672) " when they had nothing else to do,
laughed, jumped, and raged about, or, because people
have also sometimes a desire for that, they sat dowm,
wept, and lamented. Others came there later on, and
sought, sure enough, some reason for the strange
behaviour ; and thus the numberless festival legends



MY IXDEBTEDXESS TO THE AXCIEXTS 2 2 Q

and myths arose for the explanation of those practices.
On the other hand, people believed that that ludicrous
performance which took place by custom on the
festive days, belonged necessarily to festal celebration,
and they retained it as an indispensable part of Divine
worship." That is contemptible gossip, one will not
for a moment take Lobeck seriously. We are affected
quite otherwise when we examine the concept of
" Grecian " which Winckelmann and Goethe had formed
for themselves, and when we find it incompatible
with that element orgiasm out of which Dionysian
art evolves. In fact, I do not doubt that Goethe would
have thoroughly excluded anything of that kind from
the potentialities of the Greek soul. Consequently,
Goethe did not understand the Greeks. For only
in Dionysian mysteries, in the psychology of the
Dionysian condition, does the fundamental fact of
Hellenic instinct its " will to life " express itself.
What did the Hellene pledge himself for with these
mysteries ? Eternal life, eternal recurrence of life ;
the future promised and consecrated in the past ;
the triumphing affirmation of life beyond death and
change ; true life, as the universal continuation of life
by generation, by the mysteries of sexuality. On that
account, the sexual symbol was to the Greeks the
symbol venerable in itself, the intrinsic profundity
within all ancient piety. Every detail in the act of
generation, in pregnancy, and in birth, awakened



230 THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

the most exalted and solemn sentiments. In the
doctrine of mysteries pain is pronounced holy : the
" pains of travail " sanctify pain in general, all
becoming and growing, all pledging for the future,
involves suffering ... In order that the eternal delight
of creating may exist, that the will to life may
assert itself eternally, there must also exist eternally
the " pains of travail. " All this is implied by the
word Dionysos : I know of no higher symbolism
than this Greek symbolism of Dionysia. In them the
deepest instinct of life, the instinct for the future of
life, for the eternity of life, is felt religiously the way
itself to life, procreation, is recognised as the sacred
way ... It is only Christianity, with its resentment
against life at the bottom, which has caused sexuality
to be regarded as something impure : it cast dirt on
the commencement, on the pre-requisite of our life . . .



5

The psychology of orgiasm, as an exuberant feeling
of life and energy, in which pain even operates as a
stimulus, gave me the key to the concept of tragic
feeling which has been misunderstood , as well by
Aristotle, as especially by our pessimists. Tragedy is
so far from proving anything with regard to a pessi
mism of the Hellenes, in the sense of Schopenhauer,
that it is rather to be looked upon as the decisive



MY IXDEBTEDNESS TO THE ANCIENTS 23!

repudiation of pessimism, and as a verdict against it.
The affirmation of life, even in its most unfamiliar and
most severe problems, the will to live, enjoying its
own inexhaustibility in the sacrifice of its highest
types, that is what I called Dionysian, that is what
I divined as the bridge to a psychology of the tragic
poet. Not in order to get rid of terror and pity, not
to purify from a dangerous passion by its vehement
discharge (it was thus that Aristotle understood it) ;
but, beyond terror and pity, to realise in fact the
eternal delight of becoming, that delight which even
involves in itself the joy of annihilating . . . And hereby
I again touch at the place from which I once set
out, the " Birth of Tragedy " was my first Trans-
valuation of all Values : hereby I place myself again
on the soil out of which my willing, my ability has
evolved I, the last disciple of Dionysos the philo
sopher, I, the teacher of eternal recurrence . . .



THE HAMMER SPEAKETH

Thus Spake Zarathustra. III.
Of the Spirit of Gravity, 2g.



" Why so hard ! " said the charcoal unto the
diamond, "are we not near relations f "

Why so soft ? O my brethren, thus I ask yon.
Are ye not my brethren f

Why so soft, so unresisting, and yielding ? Why
is there so much disavowal and abnegation in your
hearts ? Why is there so little fate in your looks ?

And if you are unwilling to be fates, and in
exorable, how could you conquer with me some day f

And if your hardness would not glance, and cut,
and chip to pieces, how could you - create with m e
someday f

For all creators are hard. And it must seem
blessedness unto you to press your hand upon millen
niums as iip on wax,

Blessedness to write upon the will of millen
niums as upon brass, harder than brass, nobler than
brass. The noblest only -is perfectly hard.

This new table, O my brethren, I put over you :
Become hard !



THE ANTICHRIST :

AN ESSAY TOWARDS A CRITICISM

OF CHRISTIANITY



PREFACE

This book belongs to the select few. Perhaps even
none of them yet live. They may be those who under
stand my Zarathustra : how could I confound myself
with those for whom ears are growing at present ?
It is only the day after to-morrow that belongs to me.
Some are born posthumously.

The conditions under which a person understands
me, and then necessarily understands, I know them
only too accurately. He must be honest in intellectual
matters even to sternness, in order even to endure
my seriousness, my passion. He must be accustomed
to live on mountains to see the wretched ephemeral
gossip of politics and national egotism under him.
He must have become indifferent, he must never ask
whether truth is profitable or becomes a calamity to
him ... A predilection of robustness for questions
for which at present no one has the courage ; the
courage for the forbidden ; the predetermination for
the labyrinth. An experience out of seven solitudes.



240 PREFACE

New ears for new music. New eyes for the most
distant. A new conscience for truths which have
hitherto remained dumb. And the will for economy
in the grand style : to keep together one s power,
one s enthusiasm . . . Reverence for one s self ; love to
one s self; unconditioned freedom with respect to one s
self . . .

Well then ! Those alone are my readers, my
right readers, my predetermined readers : of what
account are the rest ? The rest are merely mankind
One must be superior to mankind in force, in lofti
ness of soul, in contempt . . .

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.



Let us look one another in the face. We are
Hyperboreans we know well enough how much out
of the way we live. " Neither by land nor by water
shalt thou find the way to the Hyperboreans : " Pindar
already knew that of us. Beyond the north, beyond
ice, beyond death our life, our happiness . . . We
have discovered happiness, we know the way, we
have found the exit from entire millenniums of laby
rinth. Who has found it besides ? Modern man per
haps ? " I do not know out or in ; I am whatever
does not know out or in " sighs modern man . . .
We were ill from that modernism, from lazy peace,
from cowardly compromise, from the whole virtuous
uncleanness of modern yea and nay. That tolerance
and largeur of heart which " forgives " all because
it " understands " all, is Sirocco to us. Better to live
in the ice than among modern virtues and other
south winds ! . . . We were brave enough, we spared
neither ourselves nor others ; but we did not know

16



242 THE ANTICHRIST

for a long time where to direct our bravery. We
became gloomy, were called fatalists. Our fate
that was the fulness, the tension, the damming
up of our forces. We thirsted for lightning and for
achievement, we were furthest removed from the
happiness of weaklings, from " resignation "... A
tempest was in our atmosphere ; nature which we
embody was darkened,-^/0r we had no path. The
formula of our happiness : a yea, a nay, a straight
line, a goal . . .



What is good ? All that increases the feeling of
power, will to power, power .itself, in man..

What is bad ? All that proceeds from weakness.

What is happiness ? The feeling that power in
creases, that a resistance is overcome.

Not contentedness, but more power ; not peace at
any price, but warfare ; not virtue but capacity (virtue
in the Renaissance style, virtu, virtue free from any
moralic-acid).

The weak and ill -constituted shall perish : first
principle of our charity. And people shall help them
to do so.

What is more injurious than any crime ? Practical
sympathy for all the ill-constituted and weak :
Christianity . . .



THE ANTICHRIST 243



The problem which I here put is not what is to
replace mankind in the chain of beings (man is an
end), but what type of man we are to cultivate, we
are to will, as the more valuable, the more worthy of
life, the more certain of the future.

This more valuable type has often enough existed
already : but as a happy accident, as an exception,
never as willed. It has rather just been the most
feared ; it has hitherto been almost the terror ; and
out of that terror, the reverse type has been willed,
cultivated, attained ; the domestic animal, the herding
animal, the sickly animal man, the Christian . . .



4

Mankind does not manifest a development to the
better, the stronger, or the higher, in the manner in
which it is at present believed. " Progress " is merely
a modern idea, i. e., a false idea. The European of
the present is, in worth, far below the European of the
Renaissance ; onward development is by no means,
by any necessity, elevating, enhancing, strengthening.

In another sense, there is a continuous success of
single cases in the most different parts of earth, and
from the most different civilisations, in which, in fact,
a higher type manifests itself : something which, in

16*



244 THE ANTICHRIST

relation to collective mankind, is a sort of beyond-
man. Such happy accidents of grand success have
always been possible, and will, perhaps, always be
possible. And even entire races, tribes, and nations
can, under certain circumstances, represent such a
good Inf.

5

We must not embellish or deck out Christianity :
it has waged a deadly war against this higher type
of man, it has put in ban all fundamental instincts
of this type, it has distilled evil, the evil one, out of
these instincts : strong man as the typical reprobate,
as " out-cast man." Christianity has taken the part of
all the weak, the low, the ill-constituted, it has made
an ideal out of the antagonism to the preservative in
stincts of strong life ; it has ruined the reason even
of the intellectually strongest natures, in that it taught
men to regard the highest values of intellectuality as
sinful, as misleading, as temptations. The most lament
able example : the ruin of Pascal, who believed in
the ruin of his intellect by original sin, while it had
only been ruined by his Christianity !

6

It is a painful and thrilling spectacle that has pre
sented itself to me : I have drawn back the curtain
from the depravity of man. This word in my mouth



THE ANTICHRIST 245

is, at all events, guarded against one suspicion : that
it involves a moral accusation of man. It is I should
like to underline it once more meant in the sense of
freedom from any moralic acid, and this to the extent
that that depravity is felt by me most strongly just
there, where one hitherto most consciously aspired to
" virtue " and " Divinity. " I understand depravity, one
makes it out already, in the sense of decadence : my
assertion is that all values in which mankind now
comprise their highest desirability are decadence-values.
I call an animal, a species, an individual, depraved,
when it loses its instincts, when it selects, when it
prefers what is injurious to it. A history of " higher
sentiments, " of " ideals of mankind " and it is possible
that I shall have to tell it again, would be almost
the explanation also why man is so depraved. L
itself I regard as instinct for growth, for contin^ an d
for accumulation of forces, for power : where the \f n ^
to power is wanting there is decline. My assertion
is that this will is lacking in all the highest values of
mankind, that values of decline, niJiilistic values,
bear rule under the holiest names.



7

Christianity is called the religion of sympathy.
Sympathy stands in antithesis to the tonic passions
which elevate the energy of the feeling of life : it



246 THE ANTICHRIST

operates depressively. One loses force by sympa
thising. The loss of force which suffering has already
brought upon life is still further increased and multi
plied by sympathy. Suffering itself becomes conta
gious through sympathy ; under certain circumstances
a total loss of life and vital energy may bejbrought
about_J&gt;y. sympathy, such as stands in an absurd pro
portion to the extent of the cause (the case of the
death of the Nazarene). That is the first point of
view ; there is, however, one still more important. Sup
posing one measures sympathy according to the value
of the reaction which, as a rule, it brings about, its
mortally dangerous character appears in a much clearer
M " L^rx^ght st ill- Sympathy thwarts, on the whole, in general,



. ------

the law of development, _jwhich_i_s_the law of selection.
stii prese/ves what is ripe for extinction, it resists in
of ti^r of life s disinherited and condemned ones, it
moves to life itself a gloomy and questionable aspect
by the abundance of the ill-constituted of all kinds
whom it maintains in life. One has dared to call
sympatEy a virtue~~(m~-every superior morality it is
regarded as a weakness) ; one has gone further, one
has made it the virtue, the basis and source of all
virtues, only, to be sure (which one must always
keep in sight) from the point of view of a philosophy
which was nihilistic, which inscribed the negation of
life on its escutcheon ! Schopenhauer was right in
maintaining that life was negatived by sympathy, was



THE ANTICHRIST 247

made worthier of negation, sympathy is the practice
of nihilism. Once more repeated : this depressive and
contagious instinct thwarts those instincts which strive
for the maintenance and elevation of the value of
life : it is, both as the multiplier of misery and as the
conservator of all misery, a principal tool for the ad-
vancement of decadence, sympathy persuades to
nothingness / . , . One does not say " nothingness :
one says instead, " the other world ; " or " God ; " or
"true lifej_" or Nirvana, salvation, blessedness" .. 7
This innocent rhetoric, out of the domain of religio-
moral idiosyncrasy, appears forthwith much less inno
cent, when one understands what tendency here wraps
around itself the mantle of sublime expressions ; the
tendency hostile to life, Schopenhauer was hostile
to life : therefore sympathy became to him a virtue . . .
Aristotle,, as is known, saw in sympathy a sickly and

dangerous condition, which one did well now and

then to get at by a purgative : he understood tragedy
as a purgative. From the instinct of life, one should
in fact seek an expedient to put a puncture in such
a morbid and dangerous accumulation of sympathy
as the case of Schopenhauer manifests (and alas also,
our entire literary and artistic decadence from St. Peters
burg to Paris, from Tolstoi to Wagner), that that bubble
might burst . . . Nothing amidst our unsoutt modern
ism is unsounder than Christian sympathy. To be
a physician here, to be pitiless here, to apply the






248 THE ANTICHRIST

knife here that belongs to us, that is our mode of
charity ; thereby we are philosophers, we Hyper
boreans !

8

It is necessary to say whom we regard as our
antithesis: theologians, and everything that has theo
logical blood in its veins our entire philosophy . . .
One must have seen the fatality close at hand, or,
better still, one must have experienced it in one s self,
one must have been almost ruined by it, to regard it
no longer as a jocular affair (the freethinking of Mes
sieurs our naturalists and physiologists is in my eyes a
joke they lack passionateness in these matters, the
suffering from them). That poisoning extends far wider
than one supposes ; I discovered the theological in
stinct of haughtiness everywhere where people at pre
sent regard themselves as " idealists, "-where, in vir
tue of a higher origin, they assume the right to cast
looks superior and strange at actuality . . . The ideal
ist, precisely like the priest, has all the great con-
y ^ cepts in his hand (and not in his hand only), he

plays them with a benevolent contempt against the
" understanding, " the " senses, " " honours, " " good
living, " and " science ; " he sees such under him, as
injurious and seductive forces, over which " spirit "
soars in pure being-by-itself ! as if submissiveness,"
chastity, poverty, in a word holiness had not hitherto



THE ANTICHRIST 249

done unutterably more injury to life than any fright
ful things or vices . . . Pure spirit is pure lie ... As
long as the priest still passes for a higher species of

w i * *" * * - J i .. , Q *

human being, this denier, calumniator and poisoner of JLf y/J
life by profession, there is no answer to the question. rT) 1 ^

What is truth ? Truth has been already reversed

PVVV

when the conscious advocate of nothingness and denial

passesTfbr the representative of truth . . .



9

I make war against this theological instinct : I have
found traces of it everywhere. Whoever has theo
logical blood in his veins is from the very beginning
ambiguous and disloyal with respect to everything.
The pathos which develops therefrom calls itself belief :
the closing of the eye once for all with respect to
one s self, so as not to suffer from the sight of in
curable falsity. A person makes for himself a moralu:y7
a virtue, a sanctity out of this erroneous perspective
towards all things, he unites the good conscience



to the^^^_inode of seeing, he demands that no
other mode of perspective be any longer of value,
after he has made his own sacrosanct with the
names of "God," "salvation," and "eternity." I have
digged out the theologist-instinct everywhere ; it is
the most diffused, the most peculiarly subterranean
form of falsity that exists on earth. What a theo-



25O THE ANTICHRIST

logian feels as true, must needs be false : one has
therein almost a criterion of truth. It is his most
fundamental self-preservative instinct which forbids
reality to be held in honour, or even to find ex
pression on any point. As far as theologist-influence
extends, the judgment of value is turned right about,
the concepts of " true " and " false " are necessarily
reversed : what is mostinjurious to lifejis here called
" true, " what raises, el^yate^^_--a6jmas t _4ustifies, and
makes it triumph _is called ^ false. "... If it happens
that, through the " conscience " of princes (or of the
people), theologians stretch out their hand for power,
let us not doubt what always takes place at bottom :
the will to the end, nihilistic will seeks power . . .



10

Among Germans it is immediately understood
when I say that philosophy is spoiled by theological
blood. The Protestant clergyman is the grandfather
of German philosophy, Protestantism itself is its pec-
cat^lm originale. Definition of Protestantism : the
half-sided paralysis of Christianity and reason . . . One
has only to utter the words " College of Tubingen "
to comprehend what German philosophy is at bottom
insidious divinity; . . . The Swabians are the best
liars in Germany, they lie innocently . . . Whence the
exaltation all over the German learned world (three



THE ANTICHRIST 251

fourths of which is composed of the sons of clergymen
and teachers) on the appearance of Kant, whence the
German conviction, which even still finds its echo,
that with Kant a change for the better commenced ?
The theologist-instinct in German scholars made out *
what was now once more possible ... a back door
path to the old ideal now stood open, the concept of
a " true world, " the concept of morality jis essence
of the world (these two most virulent errors that
exist !) were again, thanks to a wily-shrewd scepticism,
if not demonstrable, at least no longer refutable . . .
Reason, the prerogative of reason, does not reach
so far ... A " seemingness " had been made out of
reality ; a world, completely fabricated by a lie, the
world of " what is, " had been made reality . . . The
success of Kant is merely a theologist success : Kant,
like Luther and like Leibniz, was an additional drag

on not-too-sound German uprightness : -





A word yet against Kant as a moralist, ^jvirtue

must be our contrivance, our most personal self-

-- - _ _ . -- - - - - - ------ r _____ ..... , i

defence and necessity : in every other sense it is
merely a danger. What does not condition our life
injures it : a virtue merely out of a sentiment of
respect for the concept of "virtue," as Kant would"
have it, is injurious. "Virtue," "duty," "the good in




252 THE ANTICHRIST

itself," the good with the character of impersonalness
and universal validity chimeras, in which the decline,
the final debilitating of life, Kcenigsbergian Chinaism,
express themselves. The very reverse is commanded
by the most fundamental laws of maintenance and
growth : that everyone devise his own virtue, his own
categorical imperative for himself. A people



wjhen_ it confounds its duty with the^gejieral .concept
of duty. Nothing ruins more profoundly, or more in
trinsically than every " impersonal " duty, every sacri
fice before the Moloch of abstraction. I wonder that
Kant s categorical imperative has not been felt as
dangerous to life / . . . The theologist instinct alone
took it under protection ! An action to which the in
stinct of life impels has in its pleasure the proof that
it is a right action : and that nihilist, with Christian-
dogmatic intestines, understood pleasure as an ob
jection . . . What destroys faster than to work, think,
or feel without internal necessity, without a pro
foundly personal choice, without pleasure ? as an
automaton of " duty ? " It is precisely the recipe for
decadence, even for idiocy . . . Kant became an idiot.
And that was the contemporary of Goethe ! And
this calamity of a cobweb- spinner passed for the
German philosopher, passes for it still ! . . . I take
care not to say what I think of the Germans . . -.
Has not Kant seen in the French Revolution the
transition from the inorganic form of the state into



THE ANTICHRIST 253

the organic ? Did he not ask himself if there was an
event which could not be explained otherwise than
by a moral faculty in mankind, so that " the tendency
of mankind to goodness " was proved by it once for
all ? Kant s answer : " That is revolution. " The erring
instinct in each and everything, antinaturalness as
instinct, German decadence as a philosophy that is
Kant !

12

I put a few sceptics apart, the decent type in the
history of philosophy : the remainder are ignorant
of the first requirements of intellectual uprightness.
All of them do just like little women, all those great
enthusiasts and prodigies, they regard " fine feelings "
as arguments, the " expanded bosom " as the bellows
of Divinity, conviction as a criterion of truth. In the
end Kant attempted, with " German " innocence, to
make scientific this form of corruption, this lack of
intellectual conscience, under the concept of "practi
cal reason : " he devised a reason expressly for the
occasions in which one has not to trouble one s self
about reason, namely, when morality, when the sublime
requirement " thou shalt " becomes audible. If one
considers that, almost among all nations, the philo
sopher is only the further development of the priestly
type, this inheritance of the priest, the spurious, self-
imposed coinage, no longer surprises one. When one



254 THE ANTICHRIST

has holy tasks, for example, to improve, to save, or
to redeem men, when one carries Divinity in one s
breast, when one is the mouthpiece of other- world
imperatives, with such a mission one is already out
side of all merely reasonable valuations, one s self is
already consecrated by such a task, it is already the
type of a higher order ! . . . What does the priest care
for science ! He stands too high for it ! And the
priest has hitherto ruled ! He has determined the
concepts of " true " and " untrue ! " . . .



13

Let us not underestimate this : we ourselves, we
free spirits, are already a " Transvaluation of all Values, "
an incarnate declaration of war against and triumph
over all old concepts of " true " and " untrue. " The
most precious discernments into things are the latest
discovered : the most precious discernments, however,
are the methods. All methods, all presuppositions of
our present-day science, have for millenniums been
held in the most profound contempt : by reason
of them a person was excluded from intercourse
with " honest " men, he passed for an " enemy of
God, " a despiser of truth, a " possessed " person. As
a scientific man, a person was a Chandala . . . We
have had the entire pathos of mankind against us,
their concept of that which truth ought to be, which



THE ANTICHRIST 255

the service of truth ought te be : every " thou shalt "
has been hitherto directed against us. Our objects, our
practices, our quiet, prudent, mistrustful mode all
appeared to mankind as absolutely unworthy and con
temptible. In the end one might with some reason
ableness ask one s self if it was not really an aes
thetic taste w r hich kept mankind in such long blind
ness : they wanted a picturesque effect from truth,
they wanted in like manner the knowing ones to
operate strongly on their senses. Our modesty was
longest against the taste of mankind . . . Oh how
they made that out, these turkey-cocks of God



We have counter-learned. We have become more
modest in everything. We no longer derive man
from " spirit, " from " g odhead, " we have put him
back among the animals. We regard him as the
strongest animal because he is the most cunning : his
intellectuality is a consequence thereof. We guard
ourselves, on the other hand, against a conceit which
would fain be heard here once more : just as if man
had been the great secret purpose of zoological evolu
tion. He is by no means a crown of creation ; every
being along with him is at an equal stage of per
fection . . . And when we make that assertion, we still
assert too much : man is, taken relatively, the worst



256 THE ANTICHRIST

constituted animal, the most sickly, the most danger
ously strayed from his instincts to be sure, with all
that, also the most interesting ! As regards animals
Descartes was the first, who, with a boldness worthy
of reverence, ventured the idea of conceiving of the
animal as machina : our entire physiology interests
itself about the proof of this proposition. And, logic
ally, we do not put man apart as Descartes did :
whatever till now has been apprehended with regard
to man reaches so far precisely as he has been appre
hended mechanically. Formerly one gave man " free
will " as his dowry out of a higher order : at present
we have taken even will from him, in the sense that
no faculty can any longer be understood under the
term. The old w^ord " will " serves - only to designate
a resultant, a kind of individual reaction which neces
sarily follows upon a number of partly antagonistic,
partly congruous stimuli : will no longer " works, "
it no longer " moves "... Formerly one saw in man s
consciousness, in " spirit, " the proof of his higher origin,
of his Divinity ; in order to perfect man, one advised
him, after the manner of the tortoise, to withdraw the
senses into himself, to cease having intercourse with
the earthly, to shuffle off the mortal coil : then the
main part of him remained behind, " pure spirit. " We
have also given better thought to this matter : the
fact of becoming conscious, " spirit, " is regarded by us
just as a symptom of the relative incompleteness of



THE ANTICHRIST 257

the organism, as an attempting, groping, mistaking, as
a trouble by which unnecessarily much nerve-force is
used up, we deny that anything whatsoever can be
made perfect as long as it is still made conscious.
" Pure spirit " is a pure stupidity ; when we deduct
the nervous system and the senses, the " mortal coil, "
our calciilation is wrong that is all ! ...



In Christianity neither morality nor religion is in
contact with any point of actuality. Nothing but
imaginary causes (" God, " " soul, " " ego, " " spirit,"
" free will" or even " unfree will") ; nothing but ima
ginary effects (" sin," " salvation," " grace, " " punish
ment, " " forgiveness of sin "). An intercourse between
imaginary beings (" God, " " spirits, " " souls ") ; an ima
ginary science of nature (anthropocentric ; absolute
lack of the concept of natural causes) ; an imaginary
psychology (nothing but self-misunderstandings, inter
pretations of pleasant or unpleasant general feelings,
for example, the conditions of the nervus sympathicus,
with the help of the sign-language of religio-moral
idiosyncrasy, " repentance, " " remorse of conscience, "
" temptation by the devil, " " presence of God ") ; an
imaginary teleology ("the kingdom of God," "the last
judgement, " " everlasting life "). This purely fictitious
world is, greatly to its disadvantage, distinguished

17



258 THE ANTICHRIST

from the dream-world, in that while the latter reflects
actuality, the former falsifies, depreciates, and negatives
it. When once the concept of " nature " was devised
as a concept antithetical to " God, " " natural " had
to be the word for " reprehensible ; " that whole ficti
tious world has its root in hatred against the natural
(actuality !), it is the expression of a profound dissatis
faction with the actual . . . But everything is explained
thereby. Who alone has reasons for lying himself out
of actuality ? He who suffers from it. But to suffer
from actuality is to be an ill- constituted actuality . . .
The preponderance of unpleasurable feelings over plea
surable feelings is the cause of that fictitious mora
lity and religion : such a preponderance, however,
furnishes the formula for decadence . .



16

A criticism of the Christian concept of God
compels us to the same conclusion. A people which
still believes in itself has withal its own God. In him
it reverences the conditions by which it is to the fore,
its virtues ; it projects its delight in itself, its feeling
of power, into a being who can be thanked for them.
He who is rich wishes to bestow ; a proud people needs
a God in order to sacrifice . . . Religion, within the
limits of such presuppositions, is a form of gratitude.
One is thankful for one s self : for that purpose one needs



THE ANTICHRIST 259

a God. Such a God must be able to be both service
able and injurious, he must be able to be both friend
and foe, he is admired alike in the good and in the bad.
The antinatural castration of a God to a God merely
of the good would here be beyond the bounds of all
desirability. The bad God is as necessary as the good
God ; for one does not owe one s existence to tolerance
and humanitarianism . . . What would a God be
worth who did not know anger, revc,;:^. jealousy,
scorn, craft, and violence ? a God to whom, p^.^aps
not even the rapturous ardeurs of triumph and an
nihilation would be known ? People would not under
stand such a God : why should they have him ? To
be sure, when a people goes to ruin ; when it feels
its belief in the future, and its hope of freedom finally
vanish ; when it becomes conscious of submission as
the first utility, and of the virtues of the submissive
as conditions of maintenance, then its God also is
obliged to change. He now becomes a sneak, timid
and modest, he counsels "peace of soul," an end of
hatred, indulgence, " love " even towards friend and
foe. He constantly moralises, he creeps into the cave
of every private virtue, he becomes everybody s God,
he becomes a private man, he becomes a cosmopolitan.
Formerly, he represented a people, the strength of a
people, all that was aggressive and thirsty for power
in the soul of a people ; now he is merely the good
God ... In fact, there is no other alternative for



26O THE ANTICHRIST

Gods ; they are either the will to power and so long
they will be national Gods, or else the impotence to
power and then they necessarily become good . . .



Wherever the will to power declines in any way,
there is always also a physiological retrogression, a
decadence. The jv^ of decadence, pruned of his
r^anliest virtues and impulses, henceforth becomes ne
cessarily the God of the physiologically retrograde,
the weak. They do not call themselves the weak,
they call themselves the " good "... It is obvious,
(without a further hint being necessary) in what mo
ments in history only, the dualistic fiction of a good
and a bad God became possible. Through the same
instinct by which the subjugated lower their God to
the " good in itself," they obliterate the good qualities
out of the God of their conquerors ; they take revenge
on their masters by bedevilling their God. The good
God, just like the devil : both are abortions of deca
dence. How can one still defer so much to the sim
plicity of Christian theologians, as to decree with
them that the continuous development of the concept
of God from the " God of Israel," from the national
God to the Christian God, to the essence of every
thing good, is a progress ? But so does even Renan.
As if Renan had a right to simplicity ! It is just



THE ANTICHRIST 26 I

the very opposite that strikes the eye. When the
presuppositions of ascending life, when everything
strong, brave, domineering, and proud have been
eliminated out of the concept of God, when he sinks
step by step to the symbol of a staff for the fati
gued, a sheet-anchor for all drowning ones, when he
becomes the poor people s God, the sinners God, the God
of the sick par excellence, and when the predicate of
Saviour, Redeemer, is left as the sole divine predicate :
what does such a change speak of? such a reduction
of the divine ? To be sure, the kingdom of God has
thereby become greater. Formerly, he had only his
people, his " chosen " people. Since then he has gone
abroad on his travels, quite like his people itself,
since then he has never again settled down quietly in
any place : until he has finally become at home every
where, the great cosmopolitan, till he has gained over
the " great number," and the half of earth to his side.
But the God of the " great number," the democrat among
Gods, became, nevertheless, no proud pagan God : he
remained a Jew, he remained the God of the nooks, the
God of all dark corners and places, of all unhealthy
quarters throughout the world ! . . . His world-empire
is still, as formerly, an under-world empire, a hospital,
a subterranean empire, a Ghetto empire . . . And he
himself so pale, so weak, so decadent . . . Even the
palest of the pale still became master over him,
Messieurs the Metaphysicians, the conceptual albinoes.



262 THE ANTICHRIST

They spun round about him so long, until, hypnotised
by their movements, he became a cobweb-spinner,
a metaphysician himself. Henceforth he spun the
world anew out of himself sub specie Spmozce,
henceforth he transfigured himself always into the
thinner and the paler, he became "ideal," he became
"pure spirit," he became " absolutum," he became
"thing in itself" . . . Ruin of a God : God became
"thing in itself" . . .

18

The Christian concept of God God as God of the
sick, God as cobweb-spinner, God as spirit is one
of the most corrupt concepts of God ever arrived at
on earth ; it represents perhaps the gauge of low
water in the descending development of the God-type.
God degenerated to the contradiction of life, instead of
being its transfiguration and its eternal yea ! In God,
hostility announced to life, to nature, to the will to
life ! God as the formula for every calumny of " this
world," for every lie of " another world ! " In God
nothingness deified, the will to nothingness declared
holy ! . . .



That the strong races of Northern Europe have
not thrust from themselves the Christian God is verily
no honour to their religious talent, not to speak of



THE ANTICHRIST 263

their taste. They ought to have got the better
of such a sickly and decrepit product of decadence.
There lies a curse upon them, because they have
not got the better of it : they have incorporated sick
ness, old age and contradiction into all their instincts,
they have created no God since ! Two millenniums
almost, and not a single new God ! But still continuing,
and as if persisting by right, as an ultimatum and
maximum of the God-shaping force, of the creator
spiritus in man, this pitiable God of Christian mono-
tono-theism ! This hybrid image of ruin, derived from
nullity, concept and contradiction, in which all de
cadence instincts, all cowardices and lassitudes of soul
have their sanction !

20

With my condemnation of Christianity, I should
not like to have done an injustice to a kindred
religion, which even preponderates in the number of
its followers, to Buddhism. The two are related as
nihilistic religions they are decadence-religions, both
are separated from one another in the most re
markable manner. For the fact that they can now
be compared the critic of Christianity is profoundly
grateful to the Indian scholars. Buddhism is a hundred
times more realistic than Christianity, it has in its
nature the heritage of an objective and cool pro
pounding of questions, it arrives after a philoso-



264 THE ANTICHRIST

phical movement lasting hundreds of years ; the con
cept of " God " is already done away with when it
arrives. Buddhism is the only properly positimst re
ligion which history sho\vs us, even in its theory of
perception (a strict phenomenalism) it no longer
speaks of a " struggle against sin," but, quite doing
justice to actuality, it speaks of a " struggle against
suffering." It has this distinguishes it profoundly from
Christianity the self-deception of moral concepts behind
it it stands, in my language, beyond good and evil.
-The two physiological facts on which it rests and
which it has in view are, on the one hand, an ex
cessive excitableness of sensibility, which expresses
itself as a refined capacity for pain, and, on the other
hand, an over-intellectualising, an over-long occupation
with concepts and logical procedures through which
the personal instinct has received damage to the ad
vantage of the " impersonal " (both are conditions,
which at least some of my readers, the " objective, "
will know, like myself, by experience). On the
basis of these physiological conditions a depression
has originated : against which Buddha takes hygienic
measures. He applies life in the open air as a meas
ure against it, wandering life ; moderation and selection
in food ; precaution against all intoxicants ; similarly pre
cautions against all emotions which create bile, or heat
the blood; no anxiety either for self or for others. He
requires notions which either give repose or gaiety, he



THE ANTICHRIST 265

devises means to disaccustom one s self from others. Fie
understands goodness, benignity, as health-promoting.
Prayer is excluded like asceticism ; no categorical im
perative, no compulsion at all, not even within the
monastic community (a person can leave it). These
would all be means to strengthen that excessive ex-
citableness. Just on that account he does not require
either a struggle against those who think differently ;
his doctrine resists nothing so much as the feeling of
reverrge, of aversion, of resentment (" hostility does not
come to an end by hostility : " the moving refrain of
the whole of Buddhism . . .) And rightly so : these
very emotions would be extremely insalutary in respect
to the main regiminal purpose. The intellectual fatigue
which he lights upon, and which is expressed in an
over-great " objectivity " (that is, weakening of indi
vidual interest, loss of weight, of egotism), he combats .
by strictly recon ducting even the most intellectual
interests back to the individual. In the doctrine of
Buddha egotism became duty: the " one thing needful,"
the " how art thou freed from suffering, " regulated and
determined the whole intellectual regimen ( one may
perhaps call to one s mind that Athenian who likewise
waged war against pure " scientificness," Socrates, who
elevated ~"personal egotism to morality even in the
domain of problems).



266 THE ANTICHRIST

21

The pre-requisite for Buddhism is a very mild cli
mate, great gentleness and liberality in usages, no
militarism, and that it is the higher and learned
classes in whom the movement has its focus. Cheer
fulness, tranquility and non-desire are wanted as the
highest goal, and the goal is attained. Buddhism is
not a religion in which perfection is merely aspired
after: the perfect is the normal case.

In Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and
suppressed come into the foreground : it is the lowest
classes who here seek their goal. Here the casuistry
of sin, self-criticism and inquisition of conscience are
practised as occupations, as expedients against irk-
someness ; here the emotion towards a powerful one,
called " God, " is constantly maintained (by prayerj ;
here the highest is regarded as unattainable,- -as-.a..-.gift,
as " grace ". Here also publicity is lacking : the
hiding-place, the dark chamber are Christian. Here
the body is despised, hygiene is repudiated as sensuous-
ness ; the Church resists even cleanliness (the first
Christian regulation, after the expulsion of the Moors,
was the closing of the public baths, of which Cordova
alone possessed 270). A certain sense of cruelty to
wards self and others is Christian ; the hatred against
those thinking differently ; the will to persecute. Gloomy
and exciting concepts are in the foreground ; the most



THE ANTICHRIST 267

greatly coveted states, designated with the highest
names, are epilepsoid states ; the regimen is so chosen
that it favours morbid phenomena and over-excites the
nerves. The deadly hostility against the lords of the
earth, the " noble" and at the same time a concealed,
secret competition with them (one leaves them the
"body," one only wants the "soul") are Christian.
The hatred of intellect, of pride, courage, freedom,
libertinagc of intellect, is Christian : the hatred of the
senses, of the delights of the senses, of all delight, is
Christian . . .



Christianity, when it left its first soil, the lowest
classes, the underworld of the ancient world, when it
went abroad among the barbarian nations in quest of
power, had no longer to presuppose fatigued men,
but internally savage, self-lacerating men strong but
ill-constituted men. The discontentedness of man with
himself, the suffering from himself, is not here an ex
cessive excitableness and capacity for pain, as it is in
the case of Buddhists ; but reversely is an over-power
ful longing for ca^ls^ng pain, for discharging the inner
tension in hostile actions and concepts. Christianity
had need of barbarous notions and values in order to
become master of barbarians ; such are the sacrifice of
firstlings, the blood-drinking at the communion, the
contempt of intellect and of culture ; torture in all



268 THE ANTICHRIST

its forms corporeal and incorporeal ; the great pomp of
worship. Buddhism is a religion for late men, for kind,
gentle races who have become over-intellectual and feel
pain too readily (Europe is as yet far from being ripe for
it) : it is a conveyance of them back to peace and cheer
fulness, to regimen in intellectual matters, to a certain
hardening in corporeal matters. Christianity desires to
become master of beasts of prey ; its expedient is to
make them sick weakening is the Christian recipe for
taming, for " civilisation." Buddhism is a religion for
the close and the worn-out-ness of civilisation which
Christianity does not as yet find in existence but
which it may establish under certain conditions.






23

Buddhism, to repeat once more, is a hundred times
colder, sincerer and more objective. It no longer needs
to make its suffering, its capacity for pain, decent by
the interpretation of sin, it says simply what it thinks,
" I suffer." For the barbarian, on the contrary, suffer
ing in itself is no decent thing : he needs first an ex
planation in order to confess to himself that he suffers
(his instinct points him rather to the denial of suffering,
to silent endurance). Here the word " devil " was a :
God-send : people had an over-powerful and terrible
enemy, they did not need to be ashamed of suffering
from such an enemy.



THE ANTICHRIST 269

Christianity has some refinements at its basis which
belong to the Orient. Above all, Christianity knows
that it is quite indifferent if aught is true, but of the
highest importance so far as it is believed to be true.
Truth, and the belief that aught is true : two worlds
with entirely exclusive interests, almost antithetical
worlds, one arrives at each of the two by funda
mentally different paths. To be aware of this, makes
almost a wise man in the Orient : it is thus that
Brahmins understand it, it is thus that Plato under
stands it, it is thus that every scholar of esoteric wisdom
understands it. When, for example, it is a happiness
for a person to believe himself saved from sin, it is not
necessary, as a pre-requisite thereto, that he be sinful,
but only that he feel himself sinful. When however
belief is necessary above everything else, reason, per
ception, and investigation must be brought into discredit :
the way to truth becomes a forbidden way. Strong
hope is a far greater stimulus to life than any single,
actually occurring happiness. Sufferers must be main
tained by a hope which cannot be contradicted by any
actuality, which is not done away with by a fulfilment :
an other- world hope. (Just on account of this capability
of keeping the unfortunate person in suspense, hope
was regarded among the Greeks as the evil of evils,
as the peculiarly insidious evil : it remained behind in
the box of evil.) In order that love may be possible,
God must be a person ; in order that the lowest in-



270 THE ANTICHRIST

stincts may have a voice, God must be young". It is
necessary for the fervour of vvomen__tg_mpve.^,..iiand-
some saint into the foreground, for the fervour of men
a Mary. This, of course, on the presupposition that
Christianity desires to become master on a soil where
Aphrodisian or Adonis worships have already determined
the concept of worship. The requirement of chastity
strengthens the vehemence and internality of religious
instinct it makes worship warmer, more enthusiastic,
more soul-breathing. Love is the state in which man
sees things most widely different from what they are.
Illusory power is there at its height, like sweetening
and transfiguring power. One endures more in love
than at other times, one puts up with everything. The
problem was to devise a religion in which it was
possible to love : with that one is beyond the worst ills
of life one no longer sees them. So much concerning
the three Christian virtues, faith, hope, and charity :
I call them the three Christian shrewdnesses. Buddhism
is too late, too positivist to be still shrewd in this
manner.

24

I only touch here on the problem of the origin of
Christianity. The first sentence for its solution is :
Christianity can only be understood if one under
stands the soil out of which it has grown, it is not
a counter-movement to Jewish instinct, it is rather



THE ANTICHRIST 271

the logical consequence of it, a further inference in its
awe-inspiring logic. In the formula of the Redeemer :
" salvation is of the Jews." The second principle : the
psychological type of the Galilean is still recognisable,
but only in its complete degeneration (which at the
same time is mutilation and an overloading with
foreign traits) could it serve the purpose for which it
has been used, to be the type of a Redeemer of
mankind.

The Jews are the most remarkable people in the \
history of the world, because, when confronted with
the question of being or not-beingjthey preferred, with
a perfectly weird consciousness, being at any price:
this price was the radical ,^^^^ ^_jo|,_aU_nature L of
all naturalness, of all actuality, of the entire inner
world as well as the outer. They demarcated their
position counter to all conditions under which hitherto
a people could live, was permitted to live ; they
created out of themselves a concept antithetical to
the natural conditions, they successively reversed,
in an irreparable manner, religion, worship, morality,
history, and psychology, into the contradiction of their
natural values. We meet with the same phenomenon
once more, and in ineffably magnified proportions, al
though only as a copy : the Christian church, in
comparison with the " saintly people, " dispenses with
all pretensions to originality. The Jews, just on that
account, are the most fatal nation in the history of



2/2 THE ANTICHRIST

the world : in their after-effect they made mankind
false to such an extent that Christian can even at
present cherish.-aji__ajiti-Je wish feeling; jwidiouFcompre-
hending that he is the ultimate consequence of Judaism.
I have brought forward psychologically for the first
time, in my " Genealogy of Morals," the antithetical
concepts of a noble morality and of a ressentiment
morality, the latter originated out of a negation of
the former : but this is Jewish - Christian morality
wholly and entirely. To be able to negative all that
represents the ascending movement of life on earth,
well-constitutedness, power, beauty, self-affirmation,
the instinct of ressentiment, developed to genius, had
here to devise for itself another world, from which
the affirmation of life appeared as the evil, as the
repudiable in itself. Psychologically re-examined, the
Jewish people is a people of the toughest -.vital force.
Placed under impossible conditions, voluntarily, out of
a most profound policy of self-maintenance, it took
the part of all decadence instincts, not as ruled
by them, but because it divined in them a power by
which to get along in opposition to " the world." They
are the counterpart of all decadents : they were
compelled to cxJiibit them to illusion, they have, with
a non plus ultra of theatrical genius, known how to
place themselves at the head of all decadence move
ments (as the Christianity of Paul], and have created
something out of them which is stronger than any



THE ANTICHRIST 273

party affirmative of life. Decadence, for the class of
men who aspired to power in Judaism and Christian
ity (a priestly class), is but a means ; this class of men
has a vital interest in making* mankind sick, and in
reversing the concepts " good " and " bad," " true "
and " false " into a mortally dangerous and world-
calumniating signification.

25

The history of Israel is invaluable as a typical
history of the denaturalising of natural values ; I
indicate five matters of fact in this process. Originally,
and above all in the time of the kingdom, Israel like
other people stood in the right relation, i. e., in the
natural relation to all things. Their Javeh was the
expression of consciousness of power, the delight in
themselves, the hope of themselves : in him they ex
pected victory and prosperity, with him they had con
fidence in nature, that it would furnish what they
needed above all, rain. Javeh is the God of Israel,
and consequently the God of justice : the logic of every
people that is in power and has a good conscience
thereof. In the festal worship both these sides of self-
affirmation of a people are expressed : it is thankful
for the great destinies by which it came to the fore ;
it is thankful in relation to the course of the year and
all the good fortune in cattle-rearing and agriculture.
This state of things continued for a long time the

18



274 THE ANTICHRIST

ideal, even when, in a sad manner, it was done away
with : anarchy within and the Assyrian from without.
But the people firmly retained, as their highest desir
ability, the vision of a king who w T as a good soldier
and a strict judge : above all that typical prophet
(i. e., critic and satirist of the hour), Isaiah. But
every hope remained unrealised. The old God could
no longer do what he formerly could. They might
have to let him go. What happened ? They changed
his concept, they denaturalised his concept : they
held him fast at that price. Javeh, the God of
"justice," no longer a unity with Israel, an expression
of national pride : only a God under conditions . . .
The concept of God becomes an instrument in the
hands of priestly agitators, who henceforth interpret
all good fortune as reward, all misfortune as punish
ment for disobedience to God, for " sin : " that most
falsified manner of interpretation of a pretended " moral
order of the world " with which, once for all, the natural
concepts of " cause " and " effect " are turned upside
down. As soon as natural causality by" means of
reward and punishment has been done away with, an
antinatural causality is needed : all the rest of anti-
naturalness then follows. A God who demands, in
place of a God who helps, who surmounts difficulties,
who is, after all, the word for every happy inspiration
of courage and self-confidence . . . Morality, no longer
the expression of the conditions of the life and growth



THE ANTICHRIST 275

of a people, no longer its fundamental instinct of life,
but become abstract, the antithesis of life, Morality
as a fundamental debasement of phantasy, as " evil eye "
for everything. What is Jewish, what is Christian
morality ? Chance despoiled of its innocence ; misfortune
befouled with the concept of " sin ;" well-being as
danger, as " temptation ; " bad physiological condition
poisoned by the serpent of conscience . . .



26

The concept of God falsified ; the concept of moral
ity falsified : the Jewish priesthood did not remain
at rest there. They could make no use of the whole
history of Israel : away with it_! These priests brought
about that miracle of falsification the document of which
lies before us in a good part of the Bible : with an
unequalled scorn of every tradition, of every historical
reality, they translated the past of their own people
into the religious ; that is, they made out of it a
stupid salvation - mechanism of offence against Javeh
and punishment, of piety towards Javeh and reward.
We should feel this most disgraceful act of historical
falsification much more painfully, if the ecclesiastical
interpretation of the history of millenniums had not
almost blunted us to the requirement of uprightness
in his tor ids. And the philosophers seconded the church :
the lie of " a moral order of the world " goes through

18*



276 THE ANTICHRIST

the whole development even of modern philosophy.
What does " a moral order of the world " signify ?
That there is once for all a will of God, as to what
men have to do and what they have not to do ; that
the value of a people, or of an individual is determined
by how much or how little the will of God is obeyed ;
that in the destinies of a people, or of an individual,
the will of God is demonstrated as ruling ; i. e., as
punishing and rewarding in proportion to obedience.
The reality in place of this pitiable lie is that a para
sitic species of man, the priests, who only nourish at
the cost of all sound formations of life, misuse the
name of God : they call a condition of things in which
the priest determines the value of things, " the king
dom of God ; " they call the means by which such a
condition is attained or maintained " the will of God ; "
with a cold-blooded cynicism, they estimate peoples,
ages, and individuals, according as they were service-*
able to the priestly ascendency, or resisted it. Let
us see them at work : under the hands of Jewish
priests the great period in the history of Israel became
a period of decay ; the exile, the long misfortune was
transformed into an eternal punishment for the great
period a period in which as yet the priest was nothing.
According to their requirement, they made miserable
sneaking creatures and hypocrites, or " ungodly " per
sons out of the powerful and very freely constituted
characters in the history of Israel, they simplified the



THE ANTICHRIST 277

psychology of every great event into the idiotic formula,
" obedience or disobedience to God." A step further :
" the will of God," i. &lt;?., the conditions of maintenance
for the power of the priest, must be known, for this
purpose a " revelation " is needed. /. e., a great
literary forgery becomes necessary, a " holy book "
is discovered, it is made public with all hieratic pomp,
with fast-days and cries of lamentation for the long
" sin." The " will of God " was fixed for ever so long,
the whole evil lay in the fact that people had estranged
themselves from the " holy book "... Moses was al
ready the revealed " will of God "... What had
happened 1 The priest, with seventy and with pedantry,
had once for all formulated what he wanted to have,
"what is the will of God," even to the great and the
small imposts which had to be paid to him (not to
forget the most savoury pieces of flesh, for the priest
is a beefsteak eater) . . . From henceforth all the
affairs of life are so regulated that the priest is every
where indispensable ; at all natural events of life,
at birth, at marriage, in sickness, at death, not to speak
of the sacrifice (the meal), the holy parasite appears,
in order to denaturalise them ; in his language, to
" sanctify " them . . . For that must comprehended :
every natural custom, every natural institution (the
state, the administration of justice, marriage, the care
of the sick and the poor), every requirement prompted
by the instinct of life, everything, in short, that has



278 THE ANTICHRIST

its value in itself is, as a principle, made worthless, in
imical to any value, by the parasitism of the priest
(or of a moral order of the world), it has need of
a supplementary sanction, a value-bestowing power is
necessary, which denies naturalness therein, which just
thereby creates value. The priest depreciates, desecrates
naturalness : it is only at this cost that he exists at
all. Disobedience to God, i. e., to the priest, to " law "
now gets the name of " sin ; " the means for a person
" reconciling him again to God, " as is only fair,
are means by which the subjugation under the priest
is only more thoroughly guaranteed : the priest alone
" saves "... Re-examined psychologically, " sins " are
indispensable in every society priestly-organised : they
are the real handles of power, the priest lives by the
sins, it is needful for him that there should be sin
ning . . . Principal proposition : " God forgives him who
does penance," / . e., him who submits himself to the
priest.

27

On a soil, falsified to that extent where all natural
ness, every natural value, all reality, had the profoundest
instincts of the ruling class opposed to it, Christianity
grew up, a form of mortal hostility to reality which
has not hitherto been surpassed. The " holy people "
who had maintained only priestly values, only priestly
words, for all matters, and who, with a logicalness of



THE ANTICHRIST 279

conclusion which may inspire awe, had separated from
themselves everything of power besides that existed
on earth, as from the "unholy," "the world," "sin,"
this people produced for its instinct a final formula
which was logical to the point of self-negation : as
Christianity, it negatived even the last form of
reality, the " holy people," the " chosen people," Jewish
reality itself. The case is of the first rank : the small
seditious movement which is christened by the name
of Jesus of Nazareth, is the Jewish instinct once more,
expressed in other terms, the priestly instinct, which
no longer endures the priest as a reality, the invention
of a yet more abstract form of existence, a yet more
unreal vision of the world, than is determined by the
organisation of a church. Christianity negatives the
church . . .

I fail to see what the uprising was directed against,
as the originator of which Jesus has been understood
or misunderstood, if it was not an uprising against the
Jewish church, the word church taken precisely in the
sense in which we at present take it. It was an
uprising against the " good and just," against " the
saints of Israel," against the hierarchy of society
not against its corruption but against caste, privilege,
order, formula, it was the unbelief in " higher men,"
the denial of all that was priest and theologian. But
the hierarchy which was thereby, though but for an
instant, called in question, was the pile-work, on which



280 THE ANTICHRIST

alone the Jewish people continued in the midst of the
" waters," the toilsomely acquired last possibility of
being left, the residuum of its detached political exist
ence ; an attack upon it was an attack upon the pro-
foundest national instinct, upon the toughest national
will to life which has ever existed on earth. This
holy anarchist who incited the lowest class, the out
casts and " sinners," the Chandalas within Judaism, to
opposition against the ruling order (with language
which, if the Gospels can be trusted, would even at
the present day send a person to Siberia), was a
political criminal, so far as political criminals were
possible in an absurdly unpolitical community. This
brought him to the cross : the proof of it is the in
scription on the cross. He died for his guilt, all
ground is lacking for the assertion however often it
has been made, that he died for the guilt of others.



28

It is quite another question whether he was at all
conscious of a contrast of that kind, whether he was
not merely felt to be such a contrast. And it is but
here that I touch on the problem of the psychology
of the Saviour.

I confess that I read few books with such diffi
culties as the Gospels. These difficulties are other
than those in whose indication the learned curiosity of



THE ANTICHRIST 28 I

German intellect has celebrated one of its most me
morable triumphs. The time is far distant when I with
the sage dulness of a refined philologist, like every
young scholar, tasted thoroughly the work of the in
comparable Strauss. I was then twenty years of age :
I am now too serious for that. Of what account are
the contradictions of " tradition " to me ? How can
legends of saints be called " tradition " at all? The
stories of saints are the most ambiguous literature
that exists : to apply scientific methods to it when no
dociiments besides have reached us, appears to me con
demned in principle mere learned idling.



29

What is of account to vie is the psychologicil
type of the Saviour. For it might be contained in
the Gospels, in spite of the Gospels, however much
it might be mutilated or overloaded with strange
features : as that of Francis of Assisi is contained in
his legends, in spite of the legends. Not the truth
with regard to what he did or said, or how he died
exactly ; but the question whether his type is at all
representable now, whether it is " handed down " to
us. The attempts with which I am acquainted to pick
out of the Gospels even the history of a soul, seem
to me to be proofs of a detestable psychological
frivolity. M. Renan, a buffoon in psychologies, got



282 THE ANTICHRIST

the two most inappropriate concepts imaginable, into
his explanation of the type of Jesus, the concept of
genius and the concept of hero (" heros "). But
if anything be unevangelical it is the concept of
hero. Just the antithesis to all contending, to all
feeling one s self in struggle has here become instinct,
the incapacity for resistance here becomes morality
(" resist not evil : " the profoundest saying of the
Gospels, in a certain sense, the key to them), blessed
ness in peace, in gentleness, in inability to be hostile.
What is " glad tidings ? " True life, eternal life has
been found it is not promised, it is there, it is in
you : as life in love, in love without abatement, and
exemption, without distance. Everyone is the child
of God Jesus does not at all claim anything for
himself alone, as a child of God everyone is equal
to everyone else . . . To make a hero out of Jesus !
And to think what a misunderstanding is the
word " genius ! " Our whole concept of " intellect, "
our cultured concept of it, has no meaning at all in
the world in which Jesus lived. If one would speak
with the rigidity of the physiologist, quite another
word would be the thing here . . . We know a con
dition of morbid excitability of the sense of touch in
which the latter shrinks back in horror from every
contact, from every seizing of a firm object. Let such
a physiological habitus be translated into its ultimate
logic as an instinctive hatred against every reality ;



THE ANTICHRIST 283

as a flight into the " unintelligible ," into the " in
comprehensible ;" as an aversion from every formula,
every concept of time and space, against all that is
firmly established, custom, institution, church ; as feeling
at home in a world with which no mode of reality is
any longer in touch, in a merely " inner " world, a
" true " world, an " eternal " world . . . " The kingdom
of God is within you" . . .

30

The instinctive hatred of reality : consequence of
an extreme liability to suffering and excitement, which
no longer wants to be " touched " at all, because it
feels all contact too profoundly.

The instinctive exclusion of all antipathy, of all
hostility, of all sentiment of limits and distances : con
sequence of an extreme liability to suffering and ex
citement, which feels every resistance on its own part,
every necessity for resistance as an intolerable dis
pleasure, (/. e., as injurious, as dissuaded by self-
preservative instinct), and which knows blessedness
(delight) only in no longer offering opposition, to any
one either to the ill or to the evil, love as sole, as
final possibility of life . . .

These are the two physiological realities upon which,
out of which the salvation doctrine has grown. I call
them a sublime, extended development of Hedon
ism on a thoroughly morbid basis. Although with a



284 THE ANTICHRIST

large addition of Greek vitality and nerve force, Epi
curism, the salvation doctrine of Paganism, remains
most closely related to it. Epicurus, a typical deca
dent : first recognised by me as such. The fear of
pain, even of the infinitely small in pain, it cannot
end otherwise than as a religion of love . . .



I have given beforehand my answer to the pro
blem. The pre-requisite for it is that the type of the
Saviour be but preserved to us in a strong distortion.
This distortion has in itself much probability : such a
type could not for several reasons remain pure, entire
or free from additions. The milieu in which this
strange character moved must have made its marks
upon it, as the history, the fate of the first Christian
community must have done still more : by that fate
the type was reciprocally enriched with traits which
only become comprehensible by warfare, and by the
purposes of propaganda. By that strange and sickly
world into which we are introduced by the Gospels
a world as if taken from a Russian novel in
which the outcasts of society, nervous affections and
childish idiotism, seem to have appointed a rendez
vous the type must under all circumstances have
been rendered coarser: the first disciples, especially,
translated an essence swimming entirely in symbols



THE ANTICHRIST 285

and incomprehensibilities into their own crudity in
order to understand anything of it at all, for them
the type was only existent after having been pressed
into better known forms . . . The prophet, the Messiah,
the future judge, the moral teacher, the thaumaturgist,
John the Baptist just so many opportunities for mis
taking the type . . . Finally let us not undervalue
the proprium of all great veneration, especially sect
arian veneration : it extinguishes the original and often
painfully alien characteristics and idiosyncrasies in the
venerated being it does not see tJievi -itself. One has
to regret that a Dostoiewsky has not lived in the
neighbourhood of this most interesting decadent, I mean
some one who knew just how to perceive the thrilling
charm of such a mixture of the sublime, the sickly
and the childish. A last point of view : the type, as
a decadence type, could actually have been of a pecu
liar plurality and contradictoriness : such a possibility
is not completely to be excluded. Nevertheless
everything dissuades therefrom : tradition above all
would have to be remarkably true and objective in
this case, of which we have reasons for supposing
the contrary. In the meanwhile there yawns a con
tradiction between the mountain, lake, and meadow
preacher (whose appearance impresses one like that of
a Buddha on a soil very unlike that of India), and the
fanatical aggressor, the deadly enemy of theologians
and priests, whom Kenan s malice has glorified as



286 THE ANTICHRIST

le grand maitre en ironie. I myself do not doubt
that the profuse amount of gall (and even of esprit]
has only overflowed upon the type of the master out
of the excited condition of Christian propaganda :
one knows well the unhesitatingness of all sectaries
to shape their master into an apology of themselves.
When the first community had need of a censuring,
wrangling, wrathful, maliciously subtle theologian ink
opposition to theologians, they created their God accqr- \
ding to their need : as they also, without hesitation,
put into his mouth those completely unevangelical
concepts which they could not then do without the
" second coming," the " last judgment, " every kind of
temporal expectation and promise.



32

I resist, let it be said once more, the introducing
of the fanatic into the type of the Saviour : the very
word imperieux which Renan used annulled the type.
The " good tidings " are just that there are no more
antitheses ; the kingdom of heaven belongs to children ;
the faith whose voice is heard here is not a faith
acquired by struggle, it is there, it is from the be
ginning, it is, as it were, a childlikeness which has flowed
back into the intellectual. The case of retarded
puberty undeveloped in the organism, as a phenomenon
resulting from degeneration, is at least familiar to



THE ANTICHRIST 287

physiologists. Such a belief is not angry, it does not
find fault, it does not offer resistance ; it does not
bring " the sword," it has no idea in what respect it
might some day separate people. It does not prove
itself either by miracles or by reward and promise,
or even " by the Scripture : " it is every moment its
own miracle, its own reward, its own proof, its own
" kingdom of God." Neither does this belief formulate
itself it lives, it resists formulae. To be sure, the
accident of environment, of language, of schooling",
determines a certain circle of concepts : primitive
Christianity uses only Jewish -Semitic concepts (the
eating and drinking at the communion belong here,
those concepts, so badly misused by the Church, like
everything Jewish). But let us be careful not to see
therein anything more than a symbolic speech, a
semeiotic, an opportunity for similes. It is precisely
the preliminary condition of this anti-realist being
able to speak at all, that not a single word is taken
literally. Among the Indians, he would have made use
of the Sankhyam concepts ; among the Chinese, he
would have made use of those of Lao-tse and would
have felt no difference thereby. One might, with some
tolerance of expression, call Jesus a " free spirit " he
does not care a bit for anything fixed : the word
killeth, all that is fixed killeth. The concept, the
experience of " life " as he alone knows it, is with him
repugnant to every kind of expression, formula, law,



288 THE ANTICHRIST

belief, or dogma. He speaks merely of the inmost
things: "life," or "truth," or "light," are his ex
pressions for the inmost things, everything else, the
whole of reality, the whole of nature, language itself,
has for him merely the value of a sign, or a simile.
Here, one must take care not to mistake anything,
however great the seduction may be which lies in
Christian, /. e., in ecclesiastical prejudice. Such a sym
bolism par excellence stands outside of all religion,
all concepts of w r orship, all history, all natural science,
all experience of the world, all knowledge, all politics,
all psychology, all books, all art the " knowledge " of
Jesus is just the pure folly tJiat there should be any
thing of that kind. Civilisation is not even known to him
by hearsay, he has no need of any struggle against
it he does not negative it. The same is true of the
state, of the whole civil order and society, of labour,
of war ; he has never had any reason to negative the
" world," he has never had any idea of the ecclesiastical
concept of the " world." Negation is just what is quite
impossible for him. Dialectics is similarly lacking,
it lacks the notion that a belief, a " truth," could be
proved by reasons (his proofs are internal " lights,"
internal feelings of delight, and self- affirmations,
nothing but " proofs of force "). Such a doctrine is
not even able to contradict, it does not even conceive
that there are other doctrines, that there can be other
doctrines, it does not even know how to represent to



THE ANTICHRIST 289

itself an opposite mode of thinking . . . Where such
is met with, the former will mourn concerning " blind
ness " from heartiest sympathy for it sees the " light,"
but it will make no objection . . .



33

In the entire psychology of the gospel the concepts
of guilt and punishment are lacking ; similarly the
concept of reward. "Sin," every relation of distance
between God and man, is done away with, it is
just that which is the " glad tidings. " Blessedness
is not promised, it does not depend on conditions : it
is the sole reality the rest is symbolism for speak
ing of it.

The conseqiience of such a condition projects itself
into a new practice, the truly evangelical practice. It
is not a "belief" which distinguishes the Christian:
the Christian acts, he distinguishes himself by another
mode of acting. In that he does not offer resistance
either by word or in heart to those acting in a hostile
way towards him. In that he makes no distinction
between foreigners and natives, between Jews and
not-Jews (the neighbour, properly, the fellow-believer,
the Jew). In that he does not get angry at any one,
does not despise any one. In that he neither lets
himself be seen in the law-courts, nor takes their
claims into account (" not swearing "). In that, under

19



2 go THE ANTICHRIST

no circumstances, does he separate from his wife, not
even in the case of her proved unfaithfulness. All
fundamentally one proposition, all the consequences of
one instinct

The life of the Saviour was nothing else but this
practice, neither was his death anything else . . .
He had no need of any formulae or rites for inter
course with God not even of prayer. He has settled
accounts with the whole of the Jewish expiation and
reconciliation doctrine ; he knows that it is by the
practice of life alone that one feels himself " divine,"
" blessed," " evangelical," at all times a " child of God."
Neither " penitence, " nor " prayer for forgiveness "

is a way to God : evangelical practice alone leads to

\\

\ God, is itself " God. "- -What was abolished by the
gospel, was the Judaism of the concepts of "sin,"
"forgiveness of sin," "faith," "salvation by faith,"-
the entire Jewish ecclesiastical doctrine was negatived
in the " glad tidings."

The profound instinct for the problem how to live
in order to feel one s self " in heaven," to feel one s
self " eternal," while in every other relation one feels
that one is not in the least " in heaven : " this alone
is the psychological reality of "salvation." A new
mode of conduct, not a new faith . . .



THE ANTICHRIST 2QI

34

If I understand anything of this great symbolist,
it is that he only took inner realities as realities, as
"truths/ that he only understood the rest, all that
is natural, temporal, spatial, historical, as signs, as
occasion for similes. The concept of the " Son of
Man," is not a concrete person belonging to history,
some individual, solitary case, but an " eternal " fact,
a psychological symbol freed from the concept of
time. The same is again true, and true in the highest
sense, of the God of this typical symbolist, of the
" kingdom of God," of the " kingdom of heaven," the
"sonship of God." Nothing is more un-Christian than
the ecclesiastical crudities of a God as a person, of a
" kingdom of God " which conies, of a " kingdom of
heaven " in another world, of a " Son of God," the
second person of the Trinity. All that is forgive me
the expression the fist in the eye (oh, in what sort
of an eye !) of the gospel : historical cynicism in the
mockery of the symbol . . . But it is quite palpable
what is touched upon by the figures of " father " and
" son " (not palpable for every one, I admit) : by the
word " son " the entrance into the collective sentiment
of transfiguration of all things (blessedness) is express
ed ; by the word " father," this sentiment itself, the
sentiment of eternalness and completeness. I am asham
ed to call to mind what the church has made out of

19*



2Q2 THE ANTICHRIST

this symbolism : has it not placed an Amphitryon
story at the threshold of Christian " faith ? " And a
dogma of immaculate conception over and above . . .

But it. has thereby maculated conception.

The " kingdom of heaven " is a state of the heart-
not something which comes " over the earth " or " after
death." The entire concept of natural death is lacking
in the gospel : death is no bridge, no transition ;
this concept is lacking, because it belongs to an en
tirely different world, which is merely apparent, merely
useful to serve for symbolism. The " hour of death "
is no Christian concept, the "hour," time, physical
life and its crises, do not at all exist for the teacher
of the " glad tidings " . . . The " kingdom of God " is
nothing which is expected, it has no yesterday and no
day after to-morrow, it does not come in a " thousand
years " it is an experience in a heart ; it is every
where present, it is nowhere present . . .



35

This " bringer of glad tidings " died as he lived,
as he tangJit not " to save men, " but to show how
one ought to live. It is the practice which he left
behind to mankind, his behaviour before the judges,
before the lictors, before his accusers, and in presence
of every kind of calumny and mockery his behaviour
on the cross. He does not resist, he does not defend



THE ANTICHRIST 2 93

his right, he takes no step to avert from himself the
extremest consequences ; yet more, he exacts them . . .
And he entreats, he suffers, he loves with those, in
those who do him wrong . . . Not to defend himself,
not to be angry, not to make answerable . . . But not
even to resist an evil one, to love him . . .



36

Only we, we emancipated spirits, have the pre
requisite for understanding a thing which has been
misunderstood by nineteen centuries, that uprightness,
become instinctive and passionate, which makes war
against the holy lie even more than against any
other . . . People were unspeakably far from our
affectionate and prudent neutrality, from that discipline
of intellect which alone makes it possible to find
out such unfamiliar and delicate affairs : with an in
solent selfishness, they always sought only their own
advantage therein, they erected the church out of the
antithesis to the gospel . . .

He who sought for signs that an ironical Divinity
operated behind the great drama of the world, would
find no small support in the stupendous question-mark
called Christianity. That mankind should bow the
knee before the antithesis of that which was the
origin, the meaning and the right of the gospel, that
they should have declared holy precisely those features



294 THE ANTICHRIS

in the concept of " church " wl.h the " bringer of
glad tidings " regarded as beneal^\m, as behind him
one would seek in vain fora grander form of
grand historical irony.



37

Our age is proud of its hist )r i ca i sen ^e : how has
it been able to make itself b4i eve in the absurdity
that the gross tJiauniatnrgist am redeemer fable stands
at the commencement of Christi Ln ity, and that every
thing spiritual and symbolic i; on ly a later develop
ment ? Reversely : the histon o f Christianity and,
of course, from the death or the cross onwards is
the history of the gradually g,- O sser and grosser mis
understanding- of an original S ymbolism. With every
extension of Christianity over s till broader, still ruder
masses in whom the pre-requis-^gg out of which it was
born were more and more Backing, it became more
necessary to vulgarise, to ^arbarisc Christianity. it
has taken into itself doctrin/ es an d rites from all the
subterranean cults of the .p m pcriuin Romanum, and
the absurdity of all kinds .^f s i c kly reason. The fate
of Christianity lay in the n , ece ssity that its faith itself
had to become as sickly, &gt;( as i o \v and vulgar as the
needs were sickly, low, anii.^ vulgar which had to be
gratified by it. As church a, the sickly barbarism itself
finally swells up into po ot wer? __ church, that form of



THE ANTICHRIST 2Q5

deadly hostility to all uprightness, to all elevation of
soul, to all discipline of intellect, to all ingenious and
gracious humanity. The Christian the noble values :
it is only we, we emancipated spirits, who have re
established this greatest of all antitheses of values !



38

I do not suppress a sigh at this place. There are
days when I am visited by a feeling, blacker than
the blackest melancholy contempt of man. And that
I may leave no doubt with regard to what I despise,
whom I despise, it is the man of to-day, the man
with whom I am fatally contemporaneous. The man
of to-day I suffocate from his impure breath . . .
With respect to what is past, I am, like all who per
ceive, of a great tolerance, / . e., a generous self-over
coming. With a gloomy circumspection I go through
the madhouse world of entire millenniums (it may be
called " Christianity, " " Christian faith, " " Christian
church "), I take care not to make mankind account
able for its insanities. But my feeling changes
suddenly, and breaks out as soon as I enter the
modern period, our period. Our age knows . . .
What was formerly merely morbid, now has become
unseemly, it is now unseemly to be a Christian. And
liere my loatJiing commences. I look around me : there
is no longer a word left of what was formerly called



296 THE ANTICHRIST

" truth, " we no longer endure it when a priest even
takes the word " truth " into his mouth. Even w r ith
the most modest pretensions to uprightness, it must be
known at present that a theologian, a priest, a pope,
not only errs, but lies, with every sentence he speaks,
that he is no longer at liberty to lie out of " inno
cence, " out of " ignorance. " Even the priest knows
as well as any one knows that there is no longer
any " God, " any " sinner, " any " Saviour ; " that
" free will " and a " moral order of the world " are
lies: seriousness, the profound self -surmounting of
intellect, no longer allows anyone to be ignorant of
these matters ... All concepts of the church have
been recognised as what they are, as the wickedest
of all forms of false coinage invented for the purpose
of depreciating nature, natural values ; the priest
himself has been recognised as what he is, as the
most dangerous species of parasite, as the actual
poison-spider of life . . . We know, our conscience
knows to-day what those sinister inventions of the
priests and of the church are really worth, what pur
pose was served by those inventions by which that
state of self-prostitution of mankind has been reached
whose aspect can excite loathing the concepts,
" the other world," " last judgment," " immortality of
soul," " soul " itself : they are torture instruments, they
are systems of cruelty in virtue of which the priest
became master, remained master . . . Everybody



THE ANTICHRIST 2 97

knows that ; and nevertheless everything remains in
the old way. What happened to the last sentiment
of seemliness, of respect for ourselves, when our states
men even, otherwise a very unbiassed species of men,
and practical Anti-Christians through and through,
call themselves Christians at the present day, and go
to the communion ? . . . A prince at the head of his
regiments, splendid as the expression of the selfishness
and elation of his nation, but, without any shame,
confessing himself a Christian ! . . Whom then does
Christianity deny ? what does it call the " world ? " To
be a soldier, a judge, a patriot ; to defend one s self ;
to guard one s honour ; to seek one s advantage ; to
be proud . . . All practice of every hour, all in
stincts, all valuations realising themselves in deeds are
at present Anti-Christian : what a monster of falsity
must modern man be that he nevertheless is not
ashamed to be still called a Christian !



39

I return, I repeat the genuine history of Christ
ianity. The very word " Christianity " is a misunder
standing ; in reality there has been only one Christian,
and he died on the cross. The " Evangelium " died
on the cross. What was called " Evangelium " from
that hour onwards was already the antithesis of what
he had lived : " bad tidings, " a Dysangelium. It is



298 THE ANTICHRIST

false to the verge of absurdity, to see in a " belief "
(perhaps in the belief of salvation through Christ)
the distinguishing mark of the Christian : Christian
practice alone (a life such as he who died on the
cross lived) is Christian . . . At present such a life is
still possible, for certain men it is even necessary :
genuine, original Christianity will be possible at all
times . . . Not a believing but a doing, a not-doing
of many things, above all, a different existence . . .
For states of consciousness, or any kind of believing, a
taking-for-granted, for example, as every psychologist
knows, are quite indifferent and of the fifth rank
in comparison with the value of instincts : more strictly
expressed : the whole concept of intellectual causality
is false. To reduce the being a Christian, Christian-
ness, to a taking-for-granted, to a mere phenomenality
of consciousness, is to negative Christianness. In fact
there have never been Christians at all. The " Christian, "
what for two millenniums has been called a Christian,
is merely a psychological self-misunderstanding. Looked
at more closely, it was merely the instincts which
dominated in the Christian in spite of all his " belief "
and what kind of instincts ! " Belief " has been at
all times (for example with Luther) only a cloak, a
pretence, a curtain behind which the instincts played
their game a shrewd blindness with regard to the
dominance of certain instincts ..." Belief " I already
called it the peculiar Christian shrewdness, people



THE ANTICHRIST 2QQ

always spoke about their " belief, " but always acted
merely from their instincts ... In the world of con
cepts of the Christian nothing is contained which
is in touch w r ith actuality : on the other hand, we
recognised in the instinctive hatred of all actuality, the
motive element, the only motive element at the root
of Christianity. What follows therefrom ? That here,
in psychologies also, the error is radical, it is essence-
determining, it is substance. A concept taken away
here, a single reality put in its place and the whole
of Christianity tumbles into nothingness ! Looked at
from an elevation, this strangest of all facts, a religion
not only determined by errors, but inventive and even
ingenious only in injurious, in life-poisoning* and heart-
poisoning errors, is a spectacle for Gods for those
Deities who are at the same time philosophers, and
with whom I have met, for example, at those cele
brated dialogues at Naxos. In the hour when the
loathing leaves them (and us !), they become thankful
for the spectacle of the Christian : the miserable, small
star called earth deserves, perhaps, a divine glance,
divine sympathy alone on account of this curious case . . .
Do not let us undervalue the Christian : the Christian,
false even to -innocence, is far beyond the ape, in
respect to the Christian a well known theory of de
scent becomes a mere compliment . . .



3OO THE ANTICHRIST

40

-The fate of the gospel was decided with the
death, it hung on the " cross "... It was only the
death, the unexpected, disgraceful death, it was only
the cross (which in general was reserved for the canaille
alone), it was only this most awful paradox that brought
the disciples face to face with the real enigma, " Who
was that ? what was that ? -The feeling staggered
and profoundly insulted ; the suspicion that such a
death might be the refutation of their affair ; the fright
ful question-mark: "Why just so?" this condition
is understood only too well. Here everything had to
be necessary, everything had to have significance,
reason, loftiest reason. The love of a disciple knows
nothing of chance. It was now only that the chasm
opened up : " Who killed him ? Who was his natural
enemy ? " this question came like a flash of lightning.
Answer : Domineering Judaism, its upper class. From
that moment they felt themselves in revolt against
the established order, they afterwards understood Jesus
as in revolt against the established order. Till then
this combative characteristic, denying by word and
deed, had been absent from his likeness ; nay more,
he had been the antithesis of it. Evidently the little
community did not understand just the main tfiing, in
what respect an example was set by dying in this
manner, the freedom, the superiority over every feeling



THE ANTICHRIST 301

of ressentiment : a sign how little they understood
of him at all ! In itself, Jesus could not wish aught
by his death but to give publicly the strongest test,
the demonstration of his doctrine . . . But his disciples
were far from forgiving this death which would have
been evangelical in the highest sense, and were
equally far from offering themselves to a similar death
in gentle and charming repose of heart . . . Just the
most unevangelical of feelings, revenge, again came
to the fore. It was deemed impossible that the affair
could be at an end with this death: "recompense,"
"judgment" was needed (and yet, what can be more
unevangelical than " recompense " " punishment," and
" sitting in judgment ? ") The popular expectation of a
Messiah came once more into the foreground ; an
historical moment was seized by the eye : the " king
dom of God " comes for the judgment of his enemies . . .
But everything is thereby misunderstood : the " king
dom of Gocl " as a concluding act, as a promise ! For
the gospel had been precisely the existence, the ful
filment, the actuality of that kingdom. Such a death was
just precisely that " kingdom of God "... It was now
only that the whole of the contempt of, and bitterness
against the Pharisees and theologians was introduced
into the type of the master, he was thereby made a
Pharisee and a theologian ! On the other hand, the
ensavaged reverence of these souls entirely disjointed
did no longer endure the evangelical equal entitlement



302 THE ANTICHRIST

of everybody to be a child of God which Jesus had
taught : their revenge was to elevate Jesus in an
extravagant fashion, to sever him from themselves :
quite in the same manner as the Jews had formerly
separated their God from themselves and raised him
aloft, for revenge on their enemies. The One God,
and the One Son of God : both products of r essenti
al cnt . . .

41

And from that time an absurd problem came to the
surface : " How could God permit that ! " With respect
thereto the deranged reason of the little community
found quite a frightfully absurd answer : God gave
his Son for the forgiveness of sins, as a sacrifice. How
it w r as all at once at an end with the gospel ! The
sacrifice for guilt, and just in its most repugnant and
barbarous form, the sacrifice of the innocent for the
sins of the guilt) T ! What a horrifying heathenism !
For Jesus had done away with the concept of
" guilt " itself he denied that there \vas any gulf
between man and God, he lived this unity of God
and man as his " glad tidings "... And not as a
privilege ! From that time onwards the type of the
Saviour is entered progressively by the doctrine of
judgment and of the second coining, by the doctrine
of death as a sacrificial death, and by the doctrine
of resurrection, with which the whole concept of



THE ANTICHRIST 303

blessedness, the entire and sole reality of the gospel,
is filched away in favour of a state after death ! . . .
Paul, with the rabbinical impudence which distinguishes
him in every respect, has brought reason into this
concept, this lewdness of a concept, in the follow
ing way : " If Christ hath not been raised from the
dead your faith is vain." And all at once there arose
out of the gospel the most contemptible of all un-
fulfillable promises, the shameless doctrine of personal
immortality . . . Yet Paul himself taught it as a
reward ! . . .



One sees what came to an end with the death on
the cross : a new, a thoroughly original commencement
of a Buddhistic peace movement, of an actual and
not merely promised happiness on earth. For this
remains I emphasised it before the fundamental
distinction between the two decadence religions : Bud
dhism gives no promise but keeps every one, Christianity
gives any promise, but keeps none. The " glad tidings "
were followed closely by the worst of all, those of
Paul. In Paul, the antithetical type of the " bearer
of glad tidings" is personified, the genius in hatred,
in the vision of hatred, in the relentless logic of hatred.
What all has been sacrificed to hatred by this dys-
angelist ! Above all the Saviour : Paul nailed the Saviour
to his own cross. The life, the example, the teaching,



304 THE ANTICHRIST

the death, the significance, and the law of the entire
gospel nothing more was left when this false coiner
by hatred conceived what he alone could use. Not
reality, not historical truth ! . . . And once more the
priestly instinct of the Jew perpetrated the like great
crime against history it simply stroked out the yester
day, the day before yesterday of Christianity, it invented
for itself a history of first Christianity. Yet more:
it falsified the history of Israel over again in order
to make it appear as a history preliminary to its
achievement : all prophets are now supposed to have
spoken of its " Saviour "... The church later falsi
fied even the history of mankind into a history pre
liminary to Christianity . . . The type of the Saviour,
his teaching, his practice, his death, the significance of
his death, even the sequel to his death nothing re
mained untouched, nothing withal remained like the
fact. Paul simply shifted the centre of gravity
of that whole existence behind this existence, into
the lie of " risen " Jesus. In truth he could not use
the life of the Saviour at all, he needed the death
on the cross, and something more besides . . . To
take as honest a Paul (who had his home at the
principal seat of Stoical enlightenment) when he derives
from a hallucination the proof that the Saviour is yet
living ; or even to give credence to his account that
he had had such a hallucination ; would be a genuine
niaiserie on the part of a psychologist : Paul willed



THE ANTICHRIST 305

the end, consequently he willed also the means . . .
What he himself did not believe, was believed by the
idiots among whom he cast his teaching. His require
ment was power ; with Paul the priest strove once
more for power, he could only use concepts, doc
trines, symbols, with which one tyrannises over
masses and forms herds. What alone did Mohammed
borrow later from Christianity ? The invention of
Paul, his expedient for priestly tyranny, for forming
herds: the belief in immortality, /, e., the doctrine of
"judgment" . . .

43

When the centre of gravity of life is placed, not
in life, but in the " other world " in nothingness
life has in reality been deprived of its centre of gravity.
The great lie of personal immortality destroys all reason,
all naturalness in instinct ; all that is beneficent, that
is life-furthering, that pledges for the future in in
stincts, henceforth excites mistrust. So to live that
it has no longer any significance to live, tJiat now
becomes the significance of life . . . For what purpose
social sentiment, for what purpose to be still grateful
for descent and for forefathers, for what purpose to
co-operate, to trust, to further and have in view any
general welfare ? . . . Just so many temptations, just
so many deviations from the " right path " " One thing
is needful "... That everyone, as an " immortal soul,"



306 THE ANTICHRIST

has equal rank with everyone else, that in the uni
versality of beings the salvation of every individual can
lay claim to eternal importance, that little hypocrites
and half-crazed people dare to imagine that on their
account the laws of nature are constantly broken
such an enhancement of every kind of selfishness to
infinity, to impudence, cannot be branded with sufficient
contempt. And yet Christianity owes its triumph to
this pitiable flattery of personal vanity, it has thereby
enticed over to its side all the ill-constituted, the
seditiously disposed, the ill-fortuned, the whole scum
and dross of humanity. " Salvation of the soul "-
means, in plain words, " the world revolves around
me "... The poison of tha teaching of " equal rights
for all" has been spread abroad by Christianity more
than by anything else, as a matter of principle ;
Christianity has, from the most secret recesses of bad
instincts, waged a deadly war against every sentiment
of reverence and distance between man and man, i. e.,
the pre-rcquisite to every elevation, to every growth
of civilisation, out of the ressentiment of the masses,
it has forged for itself its principal weapon against us,
against all that is noble, glad, and high-hearted on
earth, against our happiness on earth ..." Immortality "
granted to every Peter and Paul, has hitherto been
the worst, the most vicious outrage on noble humanity.
And let us not under-estimate the calamity which,
proceeding from Christianity, has insinuated itself even



THE ANTICHRIST 307

into politics. At present nobody has any longer the
courage for separate rights, for rights of domination,
for a feeling of reverence for himself and his equals,
for pathos of distance . . . Our politics are morbid
from this want of courage ! The aristocracy of
character has been undermined most craftily by the
lie of equality of souls ; and if the belief in the " privilege
of the many " makes revolutions and will continue to
make them, it is Christianity, let us not doubt it, it is
Christian valuations, which translate every revolution
merely into blood and crime ! Christianity is a revolt
of all that creeps on the ground against wiiat is
elevated : the gospel of the lowly makes low . . .

44

-The gospels are invaluable as evidence of the in
cessant corruption within the first congregation. What
later was carried to an end by Paul with the logical
cynicism of a Rabbi, was, nevertheless, merely the pro
cess of decay which began with the death of the Saviour.
These gospels cannot be read too guardedly : they
have their difficulties behind every word. I confess
and I shall be pardoned for doing so that to the
psychologist they are just thereby a pleasure of the
first rank, as the antithesis to all naive depravity, as
the refinement par excellence, as the artistic perfection
in psychological depravity. The gospels stand apart.
The Bible in general does not admit of comparison :

20*



308 THE ANTICHRIST

One is among Jews : the chief point of view, so as not to
lose all consistency. The dissembling of one s self into
" holiness," here becoming downright genius and never
having been attained even approximately at any other
time, either in books or among men, this false coinage
in words and attitudes, as an art, is not the accident
of any individual endowment, of any exceptional
nature. Race is required for it. In Christianity,
and its art of holy lying, Judaism entire, the most
thoroughly earnest Jewish practice and technique of
hundreds of years, attains its final masterliness. The
Christian, this ultima ratio of the lie, is the Jew once
more even three times . . . The will to use, as a
matter of principle, only concepts, symbols, and at
titudes which are established by the praxis of the
priest, the instinctive repudiation of every other praxis,
of every other mode of perspective with regard to
value and utility that is not only tradition, it is in
heritance : it is only as inheritance that it operates as
nature. The whole human race, the best minds of the
best ages even one excepted, who is perhaps merely
a monster, have been deceived. The gospel has been
read as the book of innocence ... no small indication
of the masterliness with which the game has been
played here. To be sure, if we should see them, only
in passing, all these whimsical hypocrites and artificial
saints, the end would have come, and precisely be
cause I never read a word without perceiving attitudes.



THE ANTICHRIST 309

/ make an end of them ... I cannot endure a cer
tain way they have of opening their eyes. Fortunately
books are for most people mere literature. One
must not be misled : "judge not," they say, but they
send everything to hell which stands in their way. In
making God judge, they themselves judge ; in glorify
ing God, they glorify themselves ; in demanding those
virtues of which they happen to be capable yet more,
which they need in order to get the better at all,
they assume the grand airs of a wrestling for virtue,
of a struggle for the triumph of virtue. !JVe__Jive,
we die, we sacrifice ourselves for the good" ("truth,"
" light/ "the kingdom of God ") : . in fact, they do
what they cannot leave undone. In pressing themselves
through all kinds of holes, in sitting in the corner, in
living like shadows in the shade, after the manner of
sneaking creatures, they make a duty out of it : their
life in humility appears to be a duty, as humility, it
is an additional proof jof their piety . . . Ah, this
humble, chaste, charitable kind of falsehood ! " For
us virtue itself shall bear witness "... Let the gospels
be read as books of seduction with morality : moral
ity is arrested by these wretched people, they know
of what consequence morality is ! Mankind is best led
by the nose with morality^! The reality is that here
the most conscious self-conceit of tJie elect plays the
part of discretion : they have placed themselves, the
congregation," the " good and just," once for all



3 I O THE ANTICHRIST

on the one side, on the side of "truth" and the
others, " the world, " on the other side . . . That
has been" the most fatal species of ambitious mono
mania which has hitherto existed on earth : wretched
monsters of hypocrites and liars began to claim
for themselves the concepts "God," "truth," "light,"
" spirit," " love," " wisdom," " life," as If they were
synonyms of them, in order to divide themselves thus
by a boundary-line from the " world," wretched super
latives of Jews, ripe for every kind of mad-house, re
versed the values altogether according to their own
nature, as if only the Christian was the significance,
the salt, the standard, and even the ultimate tribunal
for all the rest . . . The whole calamity became possible
only by a cognate, ethnologically cognate species of
ambitious monomania, Jewish monomania, being in
the world : the gap between the Jews and the Jewish
Christians once opened up, no choice at all remained
to the latter except to apply .the procedures for self-
maintenance advised by Jewish instinct, against the
Jews themselves, while the Jews had until then applied
them only against all that was 7/&lt;?/-Jewish. The
Christian is but a Jew of " freer " confession.



45

I give a few samples of what these wretched people
have taken into their heads, what they have put into



THE ANTICHRIST 3 I I

the mouth of their master : nothing but confessions ot
" beautiful souls." *

"And whatsoever place shall not receive you, and
they hear you not, as ye go forth thence, shake off
the dust that is under your feet, for a testimony unto
them. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than
for that city." (Mark vi. n) How evangelical ! . . .

"And whosoever shall cause one of these little
ones that believe on me to stumble, it were better
for him if a great millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the sea." (Mark. IX. 42.)
How evangelical / . . .

"And if thine eye cause thee to stumble, cast it
out : it is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of
God with one eye, rather than having two eyes to
be cast into hell : where their worm dieth not, and
the fire is not quenched." (Mark. IX. 47.)- It is not
quite the eye that is alluded to.

" Verily I say unto you, there be some here of
them that stand by, which shall in no wise taste of
death, till they see the kingdom of God come with
power." (Mark. ix. i.) Well lied, lion . . .

"If any man would come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow me. For" . . .
(Remark of a Psychologist. Christian morality is refuted



* An Allusion to Goethe s " Bekenntnisse einer schonen Seele" in
Wilhelm Meister.



3 I 2 THE ANTICHRIST

by its fors : its reasons refute, thus it is Christian.)
Mark. vm. 34.

"Judge not, that ye be not judged . . . with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you."
(Matthew vn. i.) What a conception of justice, of a
"just" judge ! . . .

"For if ye love them that love you, what reward
have ye ? do not even the publicans the same ? And
if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than
others ? do not even the Gentiles the same ? " (Mat
thew v. 46.) Principle of Christian love : it wants to
be well paid in the end . . .

" But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matthew
VI. 15.) Very compromising for the "Father" refer
red to ...

" But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto
you." (Matthew VI. 33.) All other things : namely,
food, clothing, the whole necessaries of life. An error,
modestly expressed ... A little before, God appears
as a tailor, at least in certain cases . . .

" Rejoice in that day and leap for joy : for behold,
your reward is great in heaven : for in the same
manner did their fathers unto the prophets." (Luke VI.
23.) Impudent rabble ! they already compare them
selves to the prophets . . .

" Know ye not that ye are a temple of God, and



THE ANTICHRIST 3 I 3

that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ? If any man
destroy eth the temple of God, him shall God destroy ;
for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.
(Paul: i. Corinthians ill. 16.) Such utterances cannot
be sufficiently despised . . .

" Or know ye not that the saints shall judge the
world ? and if the world is judged by you, are ye
unworthy to judge the smallest matters ? " (Paul :
i. Corinthians VI. 2.) Alas, not merely the talk of a
bedlam . . . This frightful deceiver continues as follows :
" Know ye not that we shall judge angels ? how much
more, things that pertain to this life ? " . . .

" Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of the
world ? For seeing that in the wisdom of God, the
world through its wisdom knew not God, it was God s
good pleasure through the foolishness of the preaching
to save them that believe . . . not many wise after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called :
but God chose the foolish things of the world, that he
might put to shame them that are wise ; and God
chose the weak things of the world, that he might
put to shame the things that are strong ; and the
base things of the world, and the things that are
despised did God choose, yea, and the things that are
not, that he might bring to nought the things that
are : that no flesh should glory before God " (Paul :
i. Corinthians I. 20 ff.) For the purpose of understand-
ing this passage, a document of the very first rank for






3 I 4 THE ANTICHRIST

the psychology of all Chandala morality, the first
essay of my Genealogy of Morals should be read :
there for the first time the antithesis between a noble
morality and a Chandala morality born out of ressenti-
ment and impotent revenge, was brought forward. Paul
was the greatest of all apostles of revenge . . .

46

- What follows therefrom f That one does well
to put on gloves when reading the New Testament.
The proximity of so much uncleanliness almost compels
one to do so. We should as little choose " first
Christians " for companionship as Polish Jews : not
that even an objection was required against them . . .
Neither of them have a good smell. I have searched
in vain in the New Testament for even a single
sympathetic trait. There is nothing in it free, gra
cious, open-hearted, upright. Humanity has not yet
made its beginning here, the instincts of clean
liness are lacking . . . There are only bad instincts
in the New Testament, there is no courage even for
these bad instincts. All in it is cowardice, all is shut
ting of the eyes, and self-deception. Every book becomes
cleanly, when one has just read the New Testament.
To give an example, immediately after Paul, I read
with delight Petronius, that most charming and wan
ton scoffer, of whom might be said what Domenico
Boccaccio wrote to the Duke of Parma concerning



THE ANTICHRIST 315

Cesare Borgia : " e tutto festo immortally healthy,
immortally cheerful and well-constituted . . . For these
wretched hypocrites miscalculate in the main thing.
They attack, but everything that is attacked by them
is thereby distinguished. He who is attacked by a " first
Christian " is not soiled, . . . Reversely : it is an
honour to have "first Christians" for enemies. The
New Testament is not read without a predilection for
that which is abused in it, not to speak of the " wis
dom of this world" which an impudent boaster in vain
sought to put to shame by a " foolish sermon "...
But even the Pharisees and scribes have an advantage
from such antagonism : they must surely have been
worth something to be hated in such an indecent
manner. Hypocrisy that is a reproach " first Christians"
are allowed to make ! In the end the Pharisees and
scribes were the privileged : that suffices, the Chandala
hatred needs no further reasons. The " first Christian "
I fear also the last Christian, w/iom I shall per
haps yet live to see is, by fundamental instinct, a
rebel against everything privileged he lives for, he
struggles always for " equal rights ! " . . . Examined
more exactly, he has no choice. If one wants person-
" ally to be one of the " chosen of God " or a " temple
of God," or a "judge of angels"- - every other prin
ciple of selection, for example according to uprightness,
according to intellect, according to manliness and pride,
according to beauty and freedom of heart, is simply



316 THE ANTICHRIST

" world," the evil in itself . . . Moral : every ex
pression in the mouth of a " first Christian " is a lie,
every action he does is an instinctive falsehood all his
values, all his aims are injurious, but he whom he hates,
that which he hates, has value . . . The Christian, the
priestly Christian especially, is a criterion of values.
Have I yet to say that in the whole New Testament, only
a single figure appears which one is obliged to honour ?
Pilate, the Roman governor. To take a Jewish
affair seriously he will not be persuaded to do so.
A Jew more or less what does that matter ? . . . The
noble scorn of a Roman before whom a shameless
misuse of the word truth was carried on has enriched
the New Testament with the sole expression which has
value, which is itself its criticism, its annihilation :
" What is truth ! " . . .

47

What separates us is not that we do not re
discover any God, either in history or in nature, or
behind nature, but that we recognise what was
worshipped as God not as " divine," but as pitiable,
as absurd, as injurious not only as an error but as
a crime against life . . . We deny God as God . . .
If this God of the Christians were proved to us, we
should still less know how to believe in him. In a
formula : Deus qualem Paulus creavit, Dei negatio.
A religion like Christianity, which is not in touch



THE ANTICHRIST 317

with actuality on any point, which immediately falls
down as soon as actuality gets its right even in a
single point, must, of course, be mortally hostile to
the " wisdom of the world," i. e., to science, it will
approve of all expedients by which discipline of
intellect, integrity and strictness in conscience-affairs
of intellect, the noble coolness and freedom of in
tellect, can be poisoned, calumniated and defamed.
" Belief," as an imperative, is the veto against science,
in praxi, the lie at any price . . . Paul understood
that the lie, the " belief," was needed ; later the Church
again understood Paul. The God whom Paul de
vised, a God who " puts to shame the wisdom of the
world " (in the narrower signification, the two great
opponents of all superstition : philology and medicine), is
in fact only the resolute determination of Paul himself
to do so : to call " God " one s own will, thora, is truly
Tewish. Paul wants to put to shame " the wisdom of
world ; " his enemies are the good philologists and
iysicians of Alexandrian education, it is against them
aat he wages war. In fact, nobody can be a philo
logist and physician without at the same time being
an Antichrist. For a philologist looks behind the
" holy books," a physician behind the physiological
depravity of the typical Christian. The physician says,
" incurable," the philologist says, " fraud "...



3 I 8 THE ANTICHRIST

4 8

Has the celebrated story been really understood
which stands at the commencement of the Bible,
the story of God s mortal terror of science ? It has
not been understood. This priest-book par excellence
begins appropriately with the great inner difficulty of
the priest : he has only one great danger, consequently
" God " has only one great danger.

The old God, entire " spirit," entire high priest,
entire perfection, promenades in his garden : he only
wants pastime. Against tedium even Gods struggle
in vain.* What does he do ? He contrives man, man
is entertaining . . . But behold, man also wants pastime.
The pity of God for the only distress which belongs
to all paradises has no bounds : he forthwith created
other animals besides. Theyfrj 1 / mistake of God : man did
not find the animals entertaining, he ruled over them,
but did not even want to be an " animal." God conse
quently created w T oman. And, in fact, there was
now an end of tedium, but of other things also !
Woman was the second mistake of God. " Woman is
in her essence a serpent, Hera" every priest knows
that : " from woman comes all the mischief in the
world " every priest knows that likewise. Consequently,
science also comes from her . . . Only through woman



* An allusion to Schiller s saying in the " Maid of Orleans : " Mit
der Dummheit kampfen Gotter selbst vergebens.



THE ANTICHRIST 319

did man learn to taste of the tree of knowledge.
What had happened ? The old God was seized by a
mortal terror. Man himself had become his greatest
mistake, he had created a rival, science makes godlike ;
it is at an end with priests and Gods, if man becomes
scientific ! Moral : science is the thing forbidden in
itself, it alone is forbidden. Science is the first_ sin,
the germ of all sin, original sin. This alone is
morality. " Thou shalt not know : " the rest follows
therefrom. By his mortal terror God was not prevented
from being shrewd. How does one defend one s self
against science ? That was for a long time his main
problem. Answer : away with man, out of paradise !
Happiness and leisure lead to thoughts, all thoughts
are bad thoughts . . . Man shall not think and the
"priest in himself" contrives distress, death, the danger
of life in pregnancy, every kind of misery, old age,
weariness, and above all sickness, nothing but ex
pedients in the struggle against science ! Distress does
not permit man to think . . . And nevertheless ! fright
ful ! the edifice of knowledge towers aloft, heaven-
storming, dawning on the Gods, what to do ! The
old God contrives war, he separates the peoples, he
brings it about that men mutually annihilate one
another (the priests have always had need of war . . .)
War, among* other things, a great disturber of science !
Incredible ! Knowledge, the emancipation from
the priest, augments even in spite of wars. And a



32O THE ANTICHRIST

final resolution is arrived at by the old God : " man
has become scientific, there is no help for it, he
must be drowned / . . .

49

I have been understood. The beginning of the
Bible contains the entire psychology of the priest.
The priest knows only one great danger : that is
science, the sound concept of cause and effect. But
science flourishes on the whole only under favour
able circumstances, one must have superfluous time,
one must have superfluous intellect in order to " per
ceive "... Consequently man must be made unfortu
nate, this has at all times been the logic of the priest.
One makes out what has only thereby come into the
world in accordance with this logic : " sin "... The
concepts of guilt and punishment, the whole " moral
order of the world," have been devised in opposition
to science, in opposition to a severance of man from
the priest . . . Man is not to look outwards, he is to
look inwards into himself, he is not to look prudently
and cautiously into things like a learner, he is not to
look at all, he is to suffer . . . And he is so to
suffer as to need the priest always. Away with
physicians ! A Saviour is needed. The concepts of
guilt and punishment, inclusive of the doctrines of
" grace, " of " salvation," and of " forgiveness " lies
through and through, and without any psychological



THE ANTICHRIST 3 2 I

reality have been contrived to destroy the causal
sense in man, they are an attack on the concepts
of cause and effect ! And not an attack with the fists,
with the knife, with honesty in hate and love ! But
springing from the most cowardly, most deceitful, and
most ignoble instincts ! A priest s attack ! A parasite s
attack ! A vampirism of pale, subterranean blood
suckers ! When the natural consequences of a deed
are no longer " natural," but are supposed to be brought
about by the conceptual spectres of superstition, by
" God," by "spirits," by "souls," as mere "moral" conse
quences, as reward, punishment, suggestion, or means
of education, the pre-requisite of perception has been
destroyed the greatest crime against mankind has
been committed. Sin, repeated once more, this form
of human self- violation par excellence, has been invented
for the purpose of making impossible science, culture,
every kind of elevation and nobility of man ; the priest
rules by the invention of sin.

50

I do not, in this place, excuse myself from giving
a psychology of " belief," of " believers," for the use
as is appropriate of "believers". If to-day persons
are still to be found who do not know in how far
it is indecent to be a " believer " or in how far
it is a symbol of decadence, of a broken will to life,
they will know it by to-morrow. My voice reaches



322 THE ANTICHRIST

even those who are hard of hearing. It appears, unless
I have heard wrongly, that there is among Christians
a kind of criterion of truth which is called "the proof
by power." " Belief makes blessed, therefore it is
true." One might here object in the first place that
the beatifying has not been proved, only promised :
blessedness has been united with the condition of
" believing," one is to become blessed because one
believes . . . But how could that be proved, that what
the priest promises to the believer for the_^other world "
inaccessible to all control, will actually happen ? The
alleged " proof by power " is thus again, after all, only
a belief that the effect, which is supposed to follow
from belief, will not fail to take place. In a formula :
" I believe that belief makes blessed ; consequently,
it is true." But here we are already at an end. The
" consequently " would be the absurdum itself as a
criterion of truth. Granted however, with some ob
sequiousness, that the beatifying by belief be proved
(not wished only, not promised only by the somewhat
suspicious tongue of a priest), would blessedness more
technically expressed, delight ever be a proof of truth ?
So little indeed that it almost furnishes the counter-
proof; in any case the strongest suspicion against
" truth " when feelings of delight have a voice in the
question, " What is true ? " The proof by " delight " is
a proof for " delight," that is all. How is it esta
blished for all the world that true judgments give



THE ANTICHRIST 323

more enjoyment than false ones, and have, necessarily,
according to a pre-established harmony, pleasant feel
ings in their train ? The experience of all stern,
profoundly constituted intellects teaches the reverse.
Every step towards truth has had to be fought for and
there has had to be abandoned for it almost whatever
otherwise human hearts, human love, human confidence
in life, are attached to. Therefore greatness of soul is
required : the service of truth is the hardest service.
What does it mean, then, to be upright in intellectual
matters? To be stern with regard to one s heart, to
despise "fine feelings," to make one s self a con
science out of every yea and nay ! Belief makes
blessed : consequently it lies . . .



That belief under certain circumstances makes
blessed, that bliss does not make a fixed idea true,
that belief removes no mountains but places mountains
where there are none : a hasty walk through a mad-
Jiouse enlightens sufficiently on these matters. Not a
priest to be sure : for he denies by instinct that
sickness is sickness and a mad-house a mad-house.
Christianity needs sickness, almost as Hellenism needs
a surplus of healthfulness, making sick is the true
final purpose of the entire system of salvation-proce
dures of the church. And the church itself is it not
the Catholic mad-house as the ultimate ideal ? Earth

21*



324 THE ANTICHRIST

as nothing but a mad-house ? Religious man, as the
church wills him to be, is a typical decadent; the
period when a religious crisis becomes master of a
people is always distinguished by nervous epidemics ;
the " inner world " of religious man is too similar to
the " inner world " of the over-excited and exhausted
for any distinction between the two ; the " highest "
states which Christianity has hung up over mankind
as values of all values, are epileptoid manifestations.
In major em dci honor em the church has canonised
nobody but crazed people or great deceivers ... I
once allowed myself to designate the whole Christian
penitence-and-salvation-training (which can be studied
best in England at present), as a folie circulaire
methodically produced, of course upon a soil already
prepared for it, / . e., a thoroughly morbid soil._
Nobody is free to become a Christian : one is not
" converted " to Christianity, one must be morbid
enough for it ... We others, who have the courage
for healthfulness and also for contempt, how we are
permitted to despise a religion that teaches to mis
understand the body ! that does not want to get rid
of the superstition of the soul ! that makes a "merit"
of insufficient nourishment ! that combats in health-
fulness a sort of enemy, devil, or temptation ! that per
suaded itself that a " perfect soul " could be carried
about in a corpse of a body, and for that purpose
needed to formulate a new concept of " perfection,"



THE ANTICHRIST 325

a pale, sickly, idiotic -visionary essence, so-called
" holiness," holiness, itself merely a series of symptoms
of a body impoverished, enervated, and incurably
ruined ! . . . The Christian movement as a European
movement, from the beginning, is a collective move
ment of all kinds of outcast and refuse elements (in



Christianity that movement strives for power). It does
^noi express the decay of a race, it is an aggregate
formation of forms of decadence from everywhere
which crowd together and seek one another. It was
not, as is usually believed, the corruption of antiquity
itself, of noble antiquity, that made Christianity possible :
learned idiocy which even at present maintains such
a belief cannot be contradicted with sufficient severity.
At the time when the morbid, ruined Chandala classes
of the whole imperium were christianised, the count er-
type, nobility, existed in precisely its finest and most
mature form. The great number became master ;
the democratism of Christian instinct conquered . . .
Christianity was not " national," it was not racially
conditioned, it appealed to every kind of persons
disinherited of life, it had its allies everywhere.
Christianity has at its basis the rancune of the sick,
the instinct opposed to the healthy, opposed to health-
fulness. Everything well-constituted, proud, high-spirited,
and, above all, beauty, pains it in ear and eye. Once
more I remind the reader of the invaluable expression
of Paul : " the weak things of the world, the foolish



326 THE ANTICHRIST

things of the world, the base things of the world, and
the things that are despised, did God choose " : that
was the formula, de cade nee conquered in hoc signo.
God on the cross is the frightful concept behind
this symbol not as yet understood ? All that^ suffers,
all that hangs on the cross is divine . . . We all hang
on the cross, consequently we are divine . . . We alone
are divine . . . Christianity was a victory, a nobler type
of character was destroyed by it, Christianity has
been the greatest misfortune hitherto of mankind.



Christianity also stands in antithesis to all intel
lectual well-constitutedness, it can only use morbid
reason as Christian reason, it takes the part of all
the idiotic, it pronounces a curse against " intellect,"
against the supcrbia of sound intellect. Because sick
ness belongs to the essence of Christianity, the typical
Christian state, "belief," must also be a form of sick
ness ; all straight, upright, scientific paths to perception
must be repudiated by the church as forbidden paths.
Doubt is already sin ... The complete want of
psychological cleanliness in the priest betraying itself
in his look is a phenomenon resulting from dgca-
dencc, hysterical women, and children with rickety
constitutions, must be observed in respect to the fre
quency with which instinctive falsity, delight in lying
for the sake of lying, incapacity for looking straight



THE ANTICHRIST 327

and walking straight, are expressions of decadence,
" Belief " means not-wishin^tOjtoow_what__is_true. The
pietist, the priest of both sexes, is false because he
is sick ; his instinct is averse to truth having its
rights on any point. "What makes sickly is good ;
what comes from fulness, from abundance, from power,
is evil:" it is thus that the believer feels. Constraint
to lying I thereby discover every predetermined
theologian. Another mark of the theologian is his
incapacity for philology. Under philology is here
meant to be understood the art of reading well in a
very general sense, to be able to read off facts
without falsifying them by interpretation, without
losing precaution, patience, and acuteness in the
desire to understand. Philology as ephexis in inter
pretation : whether books, newspapers, reports, events,
or facts about the weather, be the matter, not to
speak of " salvation of the soul "... The way in
which a theologian it is all the same whether at
Berlin or at Rome explains an " expression of
Scripture " or an experience, a victory of his country s
troops, for example, under the higher illumination of
the Psalms of David, is always so daring that it
makes the philologist run up any wall. And what
in the world is he to do when pietists and other
cows from Swabia with the " finger of God " trans
form into a miracle of "grace," of "providence," or
of " experience of salvation, " the wretched common-



328 THE ANTICHRIST

place and chamber-smoke of their lives ! The most
modest expenditure of intellect, not to say of propriety,
should certainly suffice to bring these interpreters to
the conviction of the absolute childishness and un-
worthiness of such a misuse of divine manipulation.
With ever so small an amount of piety in ourselves,
a God who cures us of catarrh at the right time, or
who bids us get into the carriage at the exact moment
when a great rain commences, ought to be such an
absurd God to us, that he would have to be done away
with, even if he existed. God as a domestic servant,
as a postman, as an almanac-maker, after all, a word
,\ for the stupidest kind of accidents ..." Divine pro
vidence," as it is still believed in by almost every third
man in " educated Germany " would be such an ob
jection to God that a stronger could not be thought
of. And in any case, God is an objection to Ger
mans ! . . .

53

It is so little true that martyrs prove anything
as to the truth of an affair, that I would fain deny
that ever a martyr has had anything to do with
truth. By__the__tpne in which a martyr throws at
people s heads what he takes to be true, such a low
grade of intellectual uprightness, such an obtuseness
for the question of " truth " is expressed that a martyr
never needs to be refuted. Truth is no thing which



THE ANTICHRIST 329

one person might have and another might lack :
thus, at the best, peasants, or peasant-apostles like
Luther, can think concerning truth. One may be sure
that proportionally to the grade of conscientiousness
in intellectual matters, modesty, resignation on this
point always becomes greater. To know concerning five
matters, and with dainty hand to decline to know any
thing else . . . "Truth," as the word is understood by
every prophet, every sectary, every freethinker, every
socialist, every churchman, is a complete proof that
as yet there has not even a beginning been made
with the intellectual discipline and self-overcoming
which are needed for the finding of any small, ever so
small truth. The martyr-deaths, to say a word in
passing, have been a great misfortune in history :
they have seduced . . . The inference of all idiots,
women and mob included, to the effect that an affair
for which any one lays down his life (or which, like
primitive Christianity, even produces death -seeking
epidemics) is of importance, this inference has be
come an unspeakable drag upon verification, upon the
spirit of verification and precaution. The martyrs
have injiired truth . . . Even at present a crude form
of persecution is all that is needed to create an honour
able name for a sectarianism ever so indifferent in
itself. What ! does it alter anything in the value of
an affair that somebody lays down his life for it ?
An error which becomes honourable is an error



33O THE AXTICHRIST

which possesses an additional seductive charm : do you
think we would give you an opportunity, Messieurs
the theologians, of being the martyrs for your lie ?
One refutes a thing by laying it respectfully on
ice, it is just so that one refutes theologians also . . .
It was just the grand historical stupidity of all
persecutors that they gave an honourable aspect to the
cause of their opponents, that they made a present
to it of the fascination of martyrdom . . . Woman
is still prostrate on her knees before an error, be
cause she has been told that somebody has died for

it on the cross. Is the cross tJien an argument ?

But with regard to all these matters one alone has
said the word that has been needed for millenniums :
Zaratliustra.

Signs of blood have been written by them on the
way they went, and it was taught by their folly that
truth is proved by blood.

But blood is the worst of all witnesses for truth ;
blood poisoneth even the purest teaching and turneth
it into delusion and hatred of hearts.

And when a man goeth through fire for his
teaching what is proved thereby ? Verily, it is more
when one s own teaching springeth from one s own
burning.

54

Let nobody be led astray : great intellects are
sceptical. Zarathustra is a sceptic. Strength, freedom



THE ANTICHRIST 33!

derived from the force and over-force of intellect is
proved by scepticism. Men of conviction do not even
count in determining what is fundamental in value
and not-value. Convictions are prisons. Such men
do not see far enough, they do not see below them
selves : but to be permitted to have a voice con
cerning value and not-value, one must see five hundred
convictions below one s self, behind one s self . . .
An intellect which wills what is great, which wills
also the means to it, is necessarily sceptical. The free
dom from every kind of conviction, the ability to look
freely, belong to strength . . . Grand passion, the basis
and power of a sceptic s existence, still more enlightened,
still more despotic than himself, takes his entire in
tellect into service ; it makes him unscrupulous, it gives
him courage even for unholy means ; under certain
circumstances it does not grudge to him convictions.
Conviction as a means : Many things are attained
only by means of conviction. Grand passion uses,
uses up convictions, it does not subject itself to them
it knows itself sovereign. Reversely, the need of a
belief, of something that is unconditioned by yea or
nay, Carlylism, if I shall be pardoned the word, is a
requirement of weakness. The man of belief, the " be
liever " of every kind, is necessarily a dependent man,
one who cannot posit himself as an end, who cannot
out of himself posit ends at all. The "believer" does
not belong to himself, he can only be a means, he



332 THE ANTICHRIST

must be used up, he needs somebody who will use him
up. His instinct gives the highest honour to a morality
of self-abnegation : everything persuades him to it, his
shrewdness, his experience, his vanity. Every kind of
belief is itself an expression of self-abnegation, of self-
estrangement ... If it be considered how necessary
for most people is a regulative which binds them from
the outside and makes them fast ; as coercion, slavery
in a higher sense, is the sole and ultimate condition
under which the weak-willed human being, especially
woman, nourishes, conviction, "belief," are under
stood. The man of conviction has it for his back
bone. Not to see many things, to be nowhere un
biassed, to be an interested party through and through,
to have strict and necessary optics with regard to
all values these alone are the conditions for such a
kind of man existing. But he is thereby the antithesis,
the antagonist of the truthful, of truth . . . The believer
is not at liberty to have at all a conscience for the
questions of " true " and " untrue ; " to be upright here
would be his immediate ruin. Pathological conditioned-
ness of his optics makes a fanatic out of a convinced
person Savonarola, Luther, Rousseau, .Robespierre,
Saint-Simon, the type antithetical to the strong,
emancipated intellect. But the strong attitude of these
morbid intellects, these conceptual epileptics, operates
on the great mass the fanatics are picturesque, man
kind prefers seeing postures to hearing reasons . . .



THE ANTICHRIST 333

55

A step further in the psychology of conviction,
of "belief." It is now a long time since the question
was submitted by me for consideration, whether con
victions are not more dangerous enemies of truth
than falsehoods (Human, All-too-Human I. Aph. 483).
This time I should like to ask the decisive question :
does there exist at all an antithesis between falsehood
and conviction ? All the w^orld believes it ; but what
is not believed by all the world ? Every conviction
has its history, its previous forms, its tentatives and
mistakes ; it becomes conviction after for a long time
not having been so, after for a yet longer time having
hardly been so. What ? could not falsehood also be
among these embryonic forms of conviction ? It some
times needs merely a change of persons : that in the
son becomes conviction which in the father was still false
hood. Not wishing to see something which one sees,
not wishing so to see something as one sees it : that
is what I call falsehood : it does not matter whether
or not the falsehood takes place in presence of witnesses.
The commonest falsehood is that by which one de
ceives one s self ; the deception of others is a relatively
exceptional case. Now this 72&lt;?/-wishing-to-see what
one sees, this not-wishing-^-to-see as one sees, is
almost the first condition for all who are party in any
sense whatsoever ; the party-man becomes a liar by



334 THE ANTICHRIST

necessity. German historiography, for example, is
convinced that Rome was despotism, that the Germanics
brought the spirit of freedom into the world : what is
the difference between this conviction and a falsehood ?
Need one yet wonder if, by instinct, all parties (in
clusive of German historians) have the sublime words
of morality in their mouths, that morality almost
continues to exist owing to party-men of all kinds
having need of it every hour ? " This is o^ir conviction :
w r e confess it before all the world, we live and die
for it. Respect all that have convictions ! " I have
heard the like even out of the mouths of Anti-Semites.
On the contrary, gentlemen ! An Anti-Semite does
by no means become more decent because he lies
on principle . . . The priests, who in such matters
are more refined and understand very well the ob
jection which lies in the concept of a conviction,
(i. e., a mendacity that is axiomatic because it serves
the purpose) have obtained from the Jews the policy
of inserting in this place the concepts " God," " will
of God," " revelation of God." Kant also, with his
categorical imperative, was on the same road : his
reason became practical in this matter. There are
questions in which the decision concerning truth or
untruth does not appertain to man ; all highest questions,
all highest problems of value are beyond human rea
son ... To understand the limits of reason, that
only is genuine philosophy . . . For what end did



THE ANTICHRIST 335

God give man revelation ? Would God have done
anything superfluous ? Man cannot know of himself
what is good and evil ; on that account God taught
him his will . . . Moral : the priest does not lie, the
question of " true " or " untrue," in such matters as
priests speak about, does not even permit of lying.
For in order to be able to lie one would require to
he able to determine what is true here. But that is
just \vhat man cannot do ; the priest is thereby only
the mouthpiece of God. Such a priestly syllogism
is by no means exclusively Jewish or Christian ; the
right of lying and the policy of " revelation " belong
to the type of the priest, to the priests of decadence
as well as of heathendom (heathens are all who say
yea to life, to whom " God " is the word for the great
yea to everything). " Law," " will of God," the " holy
book," "inspiration," all only words for the conditions
under which the priest attains to power, by which he
maintains his power ; these concepts are found at
the basis of every organisation of priests, of every
hierarchic or philosopho-hierarchic structure. " Holy
falsehood" common to Confucius, to the Law-book
of Manu, to Mohammed, to the Christian church, it is
not absent in Plato. " Truth is here : " that means
wherever it becomes audible, the priest lies . . .



336 THE ANTICHRIST

56

Finally it is of moment, for what end there is
lying. That in Christianity " holy " ends are lacking
is viy objection to its means. Only bad ends, poison
ing, calumniating, and denying of life, despising of
body, abasement and self-violation of man through the
concept of sin consequently its means also are bad.
With an entirely different feeling, I read the Law-
book ofManu, an incomparably intellectual and superior
work, which it would be a sin against the spirit even
to name in the same breath with the Bible. It appears
at once : it has an actual philosophy behind it, in it,
not a mere bad-smelling Jewish acid of Rabbinism
and superstition, it gives even to the most dainty
psychologist something to bite at. Not to forget the
main thing, the fundamental difference from every
kind of Bible : the noble classes, the philosophers and
the warriors by means of it stretch out their hands
over the multitude ; noble values everywhere, a feel
ing of perfection, an affirmation of life, a triumphing
agreeable sensation in one s self and in life, sunshine
spreads over the entire book. All the things which
Christianity takes for objects of its unfathomable vul
garity, for example procreation, woman, marriage, are
here treated seriously, with reverence, love, and con
fidence. How can one really put a book into the
hands of children and women which contains those



THE ANTICHRIST 337

vile words : " Because of fornications let each man
have his own wife, and let each woman have her own
husband . . . for it is better to marry than to burn ? "
And is it allowable to be a Christian as long as the
origin of man is christianised, i. e., befouled with
the concept of immaculata conceptio ? . . . I know
of no book in which so many delicate and kind things
are said of woman as in the Law-book of Manu ; those
old gray-beards and saints have a mode of being
gracious towards women, which perhaps has not been
surpassed. " The mouth of a woman," the book says once,
"the bosom of a maiden, the prayer of a child, the
smoke of sacrifice, are ever pure." Another passage :
" There is nothing purer than the light of the sun, the
shadow of a cow, air, water, fire, and the breath of a
maiden." A last passage perhaps also a holy lie :
" All openings of the body above the navel are pure,
all under it are impure. In a maiden only the whole
body is pure."



57

The unholiness of Christian means is surprised in
flagranti, when for once the Christian end is measured
by the end of the Law-book of Manu, when this
greatest antithesis of ends is put under a strong light.
The critic of Christianity cannot help making Christianity
contemptible. Such a law-book as that of Manu



THE ANTICHRIST

originates like every good law-book : it sums up the
experience, the policy and the experimental morality
of long centuries ; it finishes, it no longer creates.
The pre-requisite for a codification of that kind is the
insight that the means for creating authority for a
truth slowly and expensively acquired, are fundament
ally different from those with which one would prove
it. A law-book never recounts the advantage, the
reasons, the casuistry in the previous history of a law :
it would just thereby lose its imperative tone, the " thou
shalt," the pre-requisite for its being obeyed. The
problem lies exactly in this. At a certain point in
the development of a nation, its most circumspect
class (i. e., the most retrospective and prospective)
declares the experience to be closed according to
which people are to live i. e., according to which
they can live. Its aim is to bring home from the
times of experiment and imfortunate experience the
richest and completest harvest possible. Consequently,
what is above all to be avoided, is the continuation
of experimenting, the continuation of the fluid condition
of values, testing, choosing, and criticising of values
in infinitum. A double wall is established in opposition
to this: on the one hand revelation, i. e., the assertion
that the reason of those laws is not of human origin,
not wearisomely sought out and found after many
mistakes, but of divine origin, entire, perfect, without a
history, a bestowal, a miracle, a mere communication . . .



THE ANTICHRIST 33Q

On the other hand tradition, i. e., the assertion that
the law has already existed since primitive times, that
it is impious, that it is a crime against the ancestors,
to call it in question. The authority of the law is
established by the theses : God gave it, the ancestors
lived under it. The higher reason of such procedure
consists in the design to thrust back the consciousness
step by step from the mode of life recognised as
correct (/ . e., proved by an experience immense and
sharply sifted), so that a perfect automatism of instinct
is attained, the pre-requisite for every kind of master
liness, for every kind of perfection in the art of life.
To draw up a law-book like that of Manu means
the concession to a people to become in future masterly,
perfect, to exercise ambition for the highest art of
life. For that end it must be itiade unconscious : that
is the object of all holy falsehood. The order of
castes, the highest, the dominating law, is only the
sanction of an order of nature, natural lawfulness of
the first rank, over which no arbitrariness, no " modern
idea," has power. In every healthy society, three
types, mutually conditioning and differently gravitating,
physiologically separate themselves, each of which
has its own hygiene, its own domain of labour, its
own special sentiment of perfection, its own special
mastership. Nature, not Manu, separates from one
another the mainly intellectual individuals, the in
dividuals mainly excelling in muscular strength and

22*



34O THE ANTICHRIST

temperament, and the third class neither distinguished
in the one nor in the other, the mediocre individuals,
the latter as the great number, the former as the
select individuals. The highest caste I call them the
fewest has, as the perfect caste, the privileges of the
fewest : it belongs thereto to represent happiness,
beauty, goodness on earth. Only the most intellectual
men have the permission to beauty, to the beautiful ;
it is only with them that goodness is not weakness.
Pulchruni cst pauconun hominnm : the good is a
privilege. On the other hand, nothing can be less
permissible to them than unpleasant manners or a
pessimistic look, an eye that makes deformed, or even
indignation with regard to the entire aspect of things.
Indignation is the privilege of the Chandala ; and
pessimism similarly. "The world is perfect" thus
speaks the instinct of the most intellectual men,
affirmative instinct ; " imperfection, every kind of in
feriority to us, distance, pathos of distance, even
the Chandala belong to this perfection." The most
intellectual men, as the strongest, find their happiness
in that in which others would find their ruin : in the
labyrinth, in severity towards themselves and others,
in effort ; their delight is self-overcoming : with them
asceticism becomes naturalness, requirement, instinct.
A difficult task is regarded by them as a privilege,
to play with burdens which crush others to death, as
a recreation . . . Knowledge, a form of asceticism.



THE ANTICHRIST 34!

They are the most venerable kind of man. That
does not exclude their being the most cheerful, the
most amiable. They rule, not because they will, but
because they are ; they are not at liberty to be the
second in rank. The second in rank are : the guar
dians of right, the keepers of order and security, the
noble warriors, the king, above all, as the highest
formula of warrior, judge, and keeper of the law.
The second in rank are the executive of the most in
tellectual, the most closely associated with them, reliev
ing them of all that is coarse in the work of ruling,
their retinue, their right hand, their best disciples.
In all that, to repeat it once more, there is nothing
arbitrary, nothing " artificial ; " what is otherwise is
artificial, by what is otherwise, nature is put to
shame . . . By the order of castes, the order of rank,
the supreme law of life itself is formulated only ; the
separation of the three types is necessary for the
maintenance of society, for the making possible of
higher and highest types, the inequality of rights is
the very condition of there being rights at all. A
right is a privilege. In his mode of existence every
one has his privilege. Let us not undervalue the
privileges of the mediocre. Life always becomes
harder towards the summit, the cold increases, re
sponsibility increases. A high civilisation is a pyramid :
it can only stand upon a broad basis, it has for a
first pre-requisite a strongly and soundly consolidated



342 THE ANTICHRIST

mediocrity. Handicraft, trade, agriculture, science, the
greater part of art, in a word, the whole compass of
business activity, is exclusively compatible with an
average amount of ability and pretension ; the like
pursuits would be displaced among the exceptions,
the instinct appropriate thereto would contradict aristo-
cratism as well as anarchism. There is a determination
of nature that a person should be a public utility, a
wheel, a function : not society, the kind of happiness
of which alone the larger number are capable, makes
intelligent machines out of them. For the mediocre,
it is a happiness to be mediocre ; for them the mastery
in one thing", specialism, is a natural instinct. It
would be altogether unworthy of a profounder intellect
to see in mediocrity itself an objection. It is indeed
the first necessity for the possibility of exceptions : a
high civilisation is conditioned by it. If the exceptional
man just treats the mediocre with a more delicate
touch than himself and his equals, it is not mere cour
tesy of heart, it is simply his duty . . . Whom do
I hate most among the mob of the present day ? The
Socialist mob, the Chandala apostles, who undermine the
working man s instinct, his pleasure, his feeling of con-
tentedness with his petty existence, who make him
envious, who teach him revenge . . . The wrong never
lies in unequal rights, it lies in the pretension to
"equal" rights . . . What is bad ? But I said it
already : all that springs from weakness, from envy,



THE ANTICHRIST 343

from revenge. The anarchist and the Christian are of
the same origin . . .

58

In fact it makes a difference for what object a
person lies : whether he thereby preserves or destroys.
One may institute a perfect equation between the
Christian and the anarchist : their object, their instinct
is towards destruction. The proof of this proposi
tion can be read plainly from history, it is contained
in history with frightful distinctness. If we just became
acquainted with a religious legislation whose object
was to make eternal the highest condition for
making life flourish , a great organisation of society,
Christianity, on the other hand, found its mission in
putting an end to just such an organisation, because
life flourished in it. There the proceeds of reason
from long periods of experiment and uncertainty
were intended to be invested for the most remote
advantage and the harvest was intended to be brought
home as large, as rich, and as complete as possible :
here, reversely, the harvest was blighted during the
night . . . That which stood there crre perennius, the
imperium Romanum, the grandest form of organisation
under difficult conditions that has hitherto been realised,
in comparison w r ith which everything previous, every
thing subsequent, is patchwork, bungling, and dilettan-
teism, those holy anarchists have made a "piety"



344 THE ANTICHRIST

out of destroying "the world" i. e., the imperium
Romanum, until no stone remained upon another,
until even Germanics and other boors could become
master over it ... The Christian and the anarchist :
both decadents, both incapable of operating otherwise
than disintegrating, blighting, stunting, bloodsucking,
both incarnating the instinct of mortal hatred of
whatever stands, whatever is great, whatever has dura
bility, whatever promises futurity to life. Christianity was
the vampire of the imperium Romanum, in the night
it has undone the immense achievement of the Romans,
of obtaining the site for a grand civilisation that would
require time. Is it not yet understood? The imperium
Romanum which we know, which the history of the
Roman province always teaches us to know better,
that most admirable work of art of the grand style,
was a commencement, its structure w r as calculated to
prove itself by millenniums, hitherto there has never
been such building, no building in like magnitude
sub specie crterni has even been dreamt of! That
organisation was steadfast enough to endure bad
emperors : the accident of persons must have nothing
to do in such matters, first principle of all great
architecture. But it was not steadfast enough against
the comtptest kind of corruption, against the Christian . . .
These stealthy vermin which, in darkness, obscurity,
and duplicity, approached every individual, sucking
out of him the seriousness for triie things, the entire



THE ANTICHRIST 345

instinct for realities ; that cowardly, feminine, and
honeyed crew have gradually estranged the " souls "
from that immense edifice, those valuable, those manly,
noble natures, who felt the affair of Rome to be their
own affair, their own seriousness, their own pride.
Hypocrite - sneaking, conventicle - stealthiness, gloomy
concepts such as hell, sacrifice of the innocent, unio
mystica in blood-drinking, above all the slowly-stirred-
up fire of revenge, of Chandala revenge that became
master over Rome, the same kind of religion against
the pre-existent form of which Epicurus had waged
war. Let a person read Lucretius to understand what
Epicurus combated, not heathenism, but " Christianity,"
i. e., the depravity of souls by the concepts of guilt,
punishment, and immortality. He combated the sub
terranean cults, the whole latent Christianity ; to deny
immortality was then an actual salvation. And Epicurus
would have conquered ; every respectable intellect in
the Roman empire was Epicurean : then Paul appeared.
. . . Paul, the incarnated, genius-inspired Chandala
hatred against Rome, against the world, the Jew, the
eternal Jew par excellence . . . What he found out
was how to light a " universal conflagration " by the
aid of the small sectarian Christian movement apart
from Judaism, how to sum up to a prodigious power
by the symbol of " God on the cross " all the inferior,
all the secretly seditious, the whole heirship of the
anarchist intrigues in the empire. " Salvation is of the



346 THE ANTICHRIST

Jews." Christianity as a formula for outbidding and
summing up all kinds of subterranean cults, like
those of Osiris, of the Great M other, of Mithra, for
example : Paul s genius consists in discerning this. His
instinct was so certain therein that, with regardless
violence to truth, he put the ideas with which
those Chandala religions fascinated into the mouth of
the " Saviour " of his own invention, and not only into
the mouth that he made out of him something which
a Mithra-priest also could understand. That was his
moment of Damascus : he understood that he needed
the belief in immortality in order to depreciate "the
world," that the concept of "hell" becomes even
master of Rome, that life is killed by the " other
world "... Nihilist and Christian : they rhyme in
German, and do not rhyme only . . .

59

The whole labour of the ancient world in vain :
I have no words to express my sentiments with re
gard to a thing so hideous. And in consideration
that its work was a preparation, that only the sub
structure was laid with granite self-consciousness for
the work of millenniums, the entire meaning of the
ancient world in vain ! . . . For what end the Greeks?
for what end the Romans ? All pre-requisites to a
learned civilisation, all scientific methods were already
there, the great, the incomparable art of reading



THE ANTICHRIST 347

well had already been established that pre-requisite
to the tradition of civilisation, to the unity of
science; natural science in alliance with mathematics
and mechanics were on the best of all paths, the
sense for fact, the last and most valuable of all senses,
had its schools and its tradition already centuries old !
Is that understood ? Every thing essential had been
discovered to enable people to go to work : the
methods, it must be repeated ten times, are the essen
tial thing, also the most difficult thing, and besides
the things that have habit and indolence longest against
them. What we have now won back for ourselves
with unspeakable self- vanquishing (for we have still
somehow all bad instincts, Christian instincts in our
nature) the open look in presence of reality, the
cautious hand, patience and earnestness in details, all
the righteousness in knowledge, it was already there !
already, more than two thousand years ago ! And
added thereto, the excellent, refined tact and taste !
Not as brain drilling ! Not as " German " culture with
boorish manners ! But as body, as bearing, as instinct,
in a word, as reality ... All in vain ! Ere the
morrow, merely a memory ! The Greeks ! The
Romans ! Nobility of instinct, taste, methodical investi
gation, genius for organisation and administration,
belief in, "mil to the future of man, the great yea
to all things visible as imperium Romanum, visible to
all senses, the grand style, no longer merely art, but



348 THE ANTICHRIST

become reality, truth, life . . .And choked in the
night, not by any natural accident ! Not trampled
down by Germanics and other heavy-footed creatures !
But put to shame by crafty, secretive, invisible, anaemic
vampires ! Not conquered, only sucked out ! . . . Hidden
vindictiveness, petty envy become master ! Everything
wretched, suffering from itself, visited by bad feelings,
the entire Ghetto world of soul, uppermost all at once !
One has but to read any Christian agitator,
Saint Augustine for instance, to be able to smell
what dirty fellows have thereby got uppermost. One
would be thoroughly deceived by presupposing any want
of understanding in the leaders of the Christian move
ment : oh, they are shrewd, shrewd even to holiness,
Messieurs the Fathers of the Church ! What they lack
is something quite different. Nature neglected them,
it forgot to give them a modest dowry of respect
able, decent, cleanly instincts ... In confidence, they
are not even men ... If Islam despises Christianity it
has a thousand times the right to do so : Islam has
men for a pre-requisite . . .

60

Christianity has made us lose the harvest of ancient
civilisation, it has again, later, made us lose the harvest
of Islam civilisation. The wonderful world of Moorish
civilisation of Spain, on the whole nearer akin to us,
speaking more to sense and taste than Rome and



THE ANTICHRIST 349

Greece, was trampled down (I do not say by what
sort of feet), why ? because it owed its origin to noble,
to manly instincts, because it said yea to life, even
with the rare and refined jewels of Moorish life ! . . .
The crusaders, later, combated something before which
it might have been more becoming for them to lie in
the dust, a civilisation in comparison with which even
our nineteenth century might appear to itself very
poor, very " late." To be sure, they wanted to gain
booty : the Orient was rich . . . Let us not be bias
sed ! Crusades superior piracy, that is all. German
nobility, a Viking nobility at bottom, was there in its
element : the church knew only too well by what
German nobility is attracted . . . The German noble,
always the " Swiss guard " of the church, always in the
service of all bad instincts of the church, but well paid. . .
That the church, just with the aid of German swords,
German blood and courage, has carried through its
mortally hostile warfare against everything noble upon
earth ! There are at this place a great number of
painful questions. German nobility is scarcely to be met
with in the history of higher civilisation : the reason is
obvious . . . Christianity, alcohol the two great means
of corruption . . . For in itself, there should be no
choice in the face of Islam and Christianity, as little
as in the face of an Arab and a Jew. The decision
is given ; nobody is still free to choose here. Either
a person is a Chandala, or he is not . . . War to the



35O THE ANTICHRIST

knife with Rome ! Peace, friendship with Islam : it
was thus that the great free spirit, the genius among
the German emperors, Frederic n. felt, it was thus
that he did. What ? has a German to be first a
genius, to be first a free spirit in order to feel be
comingly ? I do not understand how a German could
ever feel Christian . . .

61

Here it is necessary to touch upon a reminiscence
a hundred times more painful to Germans. The Ger
mans have caused Europe the loss of the last great
harvest of civilisation that was to be garnered for
Europe the Renaissance. Is it at last understood, is it
desired to be understood what the Renaissance was ? The
transvaluation of Christian values, the attempt, under
taken with all means, with all instincts, with all genius,
to bring about the triumph of the opposite values, the
noble values . . . There has only been this great
war hitherto, there has hitherto been no more de
cisive question than the Renaissance, my question is its
question : neither has there ever been a form of attack
more fundamental, more direct, more strenuously de
livered with a whole front upon the centre of the
enemy ! To attack at the most decisive place, at the
seat of Christianity itself, to set in this respect upon
the throne the noble values i. e. } to introduce them
into the most radical requirements and longings of



THE ANTICHRIST 351

those sitting there ... I see before me the possibility
of a perfectly supernatural enchantment and colour
charm : it seems to me to shine in all tremors of
refined beauty, that there is an art at work in it, so
divine, so devilishly divine, that one might seek for
millenniums in vain for a second example of such a
possibility ; I see a spectacle so ingenious, so wonder
fully paradoxical at the same time, that all Divinities
of Olympus would have had an occasion for an im
mortal laughter Cccsar Borgia as Pope . . . Am I
understood ? Well, that would have been the triumph
for which / alone am longing at present ; Christianity
would thereby have been done away with ! What
happened ? A German monk, Luther, came to Rome.
This monk, with all the vindictive instincts of an
abortive priest in his nature, became furious against
the Renaissance in Rome . . . Instead of, with the pro-
foundest gratitude, understanding the prodigy that had
taken place, the overcoming of Christianity at its
seat, his hatred only knew how to draw its nourish
ment from this spectacle. A religious person thinks
only of himself. Luther saw the depravity of Popery,
while the very reverse was palpable : the old depravity,
the peccatum originate, Christianity, no longer sat on
the throne of the Pope ! But life ! The triumph of
life ! The great yea to all things high, beautiful and
daring ! . . . And Luther restored the Church once
more : he attacked it . The Renaissance an event



352 THE ANTICHRIST

without meaning, a great in-vain ! Ah those Germans,
what they have already cost us ! In-vain that has
ever been the work of the Germans. The Reformation ;
Leibniz ; Kant and so-called German philosophy ; the
wars of " Liberation ; " the Empire every time an in-
vain for something that had already existed, for some
thing irrecoverable . . . They are my enemies, I con
fess it, these Germans : In despising them I despise,
every kind of uncleanliness in concepts and valuations,
every kind of cowardice in presence of every straight
forward yea and nay. They have felted and confused,
for a thousand years almost, whatever they laid their
fingers on, they have on their conscience all the half-
nesses the three-eighthnesses ! from which Europe
is sick, they have also on their conscience the foulest
kind of Christianity, the most incurable, the most
irrefutable that exists, Protestantism ... If we do not
get done with Christianity, the Germans will be to
blame for it ...

62

-With this I am at the conclusion and pronounce
my sentence. I condemn Christianity, I bring against
the Christian church the most terrible of all accusations
that ever an accuser has taken into his mouth. It is
to me the greatest of all imaginable corruptions, it
has had the will to the ultimate corruption that is
at all possible. The Christian church has left nothing



THE ANTICHRIST 353

untouched- with its depravity, it has made a worthless-
ness out of every value, a lie out of every truth, a
baseness of soul out of every straightforwardness. Let
a person still dare to speak to me of its "humanitarian"
blessings ! To do away with any state of distress
whatsoever was counter to its profoundest expediency,
it lived by states of distress, it created states of distress
in order to perpetuate itself eternally . . . The worm
of sin for example ; it is only the church that has
enriched mankind with this state of distress ! The
" equality of souls before God," this falsehood, this
pretence for the rancunes of all the base-minded, this
explosive material of a concept which has finally be
come revolution, modern idea, and decadence principle
of the whole order of society is Christian dynamite . . .
" Humanitarian " blessings of Christianity ! To breed
out of hiimanitas a self-contradiction, an art of self-
violation, a will to the lie at any price, a repugnance,
a contempt for all good and straightforward instincts !
Those are for me blessings of Christianity ! Para
sitism as the sole praxis of the church ; drinking
out all blood, all love, all hope for life, with its
anaemic ideal of holiness ; the other world as the will
to the negation of every reality ; the cross as the
rallying sign for the most subterranean conspiracy
that has ever existed, against healthiness, beauty,
well- constitutedn ess, courage, intellect, benevolence of
soul, against life itself . . .

23



354 THE ANTICHRIST

This eternal accusation of Christianity I shall write
on all walls, wherever there are walls, I have letters
for making even the blind see ... I call Christianity
the one great curse, the one great intrinsic depravity,
the one great instinct of revenge for which no ex
pedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret, subterranean,
mean, I call it the one immortal blemish of man
kind.